EconomicsofEducationReview47 (2015) 34–48
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EconomicsofEducation Review
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/econedurev
Does computer-assisted learningimprovelearningoutcomes?
Evidence froma randomized experimentinmigrantschoolsin
Beijing
Fang Laia,b,∗, RenfuLuoc, Linxiu Zhangc, XinzheHuangd, Scott Rozellea
a Freeman SpogliInstitute forInternational Studies, StanfordUniversity, 5thFloor, Encina Hall,616 Serra Street, Stanford, CA94305,USA
b LICOS(Centre forInstitutionsand EconomicPerformance),KatholicUniversityof Leuven, DeBériotstraat 34,B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
c Center forChineseAgricultural Policy,Institute ofGeographicalSciences andNaturalResourcesResearch,ChineseAcademyofSciences, No.
11-ADatunRoad,ChaoyangDistrict,Beijing100101,PR China
d Department ofAgricultural andResourceEconomics,2116SocialSciencesand Humanities,UniversityofCalifornia,Davis, OneShields
Avenue, Davis, CA95616,USA
a r t i c l e i n f o
a b s t r a c t
Articlehistory:
Received14 September2013
Revised17 March 2015
Accepted18 March 2015
Availableonline8 April2015
JEL classification:
I20
I21
I28
O15
Keywords:
Education
Development
Computer-assistedlearning
Randomassignment
Testscores
China
Migration
The education of the disadvantaged population has been a long-standing challenge to ed-
ucation systems in both developed and developing countries. Although computer-assisted
learning (CAL) has been considered one alternative to improve learning outcomes in a cost-
effectiveway,theempiricalevidenceofitsimpactsonimprovinglearningoutcomesismixed.
This paper uses a randomized field experiment to explore the effects of CAL on student aca-
demic and non-academic outcomes for students in migrant schools in Beijing. Our results
show that a remedial CAL program held out of regular school hours improved the student
standardized math scores by 0.15 standard deviations and most of the program effect took
place within 2 months after the start of the program. Students with less-educated parents
benefited more from the program. Moreover, CAL also significantly increased the students’
interest in learning.
© 2015 Elsevier Ltd.All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The education of poor and disadvantaged population has
beenalong-standingchallengetoeducationsystemsinboth
developed and developing countries (e.g. Glewwe & Kremer,
2006; Planty et al., 2008; World Bank, 2004). In confronting
the challenge, efforts have been made to provide adequate
educational inputs such as textbooks and school facilities
for disadvantageous populations in both developed and
developing countries. Unfortunately these initiatives seem
to have been unsuccessful in advancing learning outcomes
(e.g., Glewwe & Moulin, 2002; Glewwe & Zitzewitz, 2004;
Hanushek, 1986, 1995). As a consequence, researchers are
actively exploring other ways of delivering educational
inputsinorderto better improvelearningoutcomes.
Computer-assisted learning (CAL) is one such alternative
(e.g.,Banerjee,Cole,Duflo,&Linden,2007;Barrow,Markman,
& Rouse, 2008; Linden, 2008). Computer-assisted learning
∗ Corresponding author at: Freeman Spogli Institute for International
Studies, 5th Floor, Encina Hall, 616 Serra Street, Stanford, CA 94305-6055,
USA.Tel.: +1510 847 9811; fax: +1650-725 1992.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2015.03.005
0272-7757/© 2015ElsevierLtd.Allrights reserved.
F. Laiet al./EconomicsofEducationReview47 (2015)34–48 35
involves the use of computers and modern computing
technologies, embodied in both software and hardware
devices, to enhance learning via computerized instruction,
drills and exercises (Kirkpatrick & Cuban, 1998; Present’s
CommitteeofAdvisorsonScienceandTechnology,1997).For
students that live in vulnerable populations who often have
to go to schools that are poor in quality, CAL can be a good
substitute for teachers when the teachers are not available
or have too little training and/or motivation to provide
adequate instruction to the students either during or after
schoolhours.CALcanalsoprovideremedialtutoringservices
whencommercializedservicesareeithernotavailableornot
affordable. Finally, CAL can provide help that parents who
areilliterateortoobusycannotprovide.Inthesesenses,CAL
can be particularly effective in developing countries, where
schools are plagued with poor facilities and unqualified
teachers and computer technologies are relatively new and
may bebeyondthepurchaseoptionsfor mostfamilies.
Despite its promise, the empirical evidence on the effec-
tiveness of CAL in promoting learning is mixed (e.g. Angrist
&Lavy,2002;Fuchs&Woosmann,2004;Goolsbee&Guryan,
2006). An important limitation of these early studies is that
they usually examined CAL as a form of an educational in-
put with little attention to how computers were used in the
schools.Laterstudiesimprovedontheseearlystudiesbyeval-
uating well-defined individual CAL programs using random-
izedexperimentsalsofoundmixedevidenceoftheeffective-
ness of CAL (e.g., Barrow et al., 2008; Dynarski, 2007; Rouse
& Krueger, 2004).
The existing literature has several limitations that have
contributed to the ambiguous assessment of the effective-
ness of CAL programs. First, the majority of CAL evaluations
havebeendoneinthecontextofdevelopedcountries,where
educational resources may be abundant and computers are
not novel to the students. Thus, it may not to be surprising
thatmanystudieshavefoundnosignificantbeneficialeffects
of CAL on learning outcomes. However, there are few evalu-
ations of CAL in the context of developing countries—where
educational resources are highly constrained and access to
technologies is limited. In the rare cases in which CAL pro-
grams in developing countries have been evaluated, most
show positive effects on student test scores (Banerjee et al.,
2007; He, Linden, & MacLeod, 2008; Linden, 2008). Second,
insteadofbeingsupplementarytoregularschooltime,many
of the CAL programs in the existing literature often interfere
with the regular school curriculum (as students are pulled
out of class for CAL sessions). As a consequence, part of the
full impact of CAL may be offset by the negative effects of
missing classes, creating a downward bias in the estimation
of the genuine impacts of the CAL intervention (Angrist &
Lavy, 2002; Linden, 2008; Rouse & Krueger, 2004). Finally,
besides academic performance, CAL might also have benefi-
cial effects on non-academic outcomes. These non-cognitive
outcomes,toourknowledge,haveseldombeenexaminedin
the literature.
The overall goal of this paper is to explore the nature of
the effects of CAL on not only student academic outcomes
but also non-academic outcomes among underserved stu-
dent populations in a developing country. In pursuit of this
goal,weidentifyfourparticularobjectives.First,weexamine
theimmediateimpactsofaCALmathprogramimplemented
outofregularschoolhoursonstudentacademicperformance
in math (as measured by standardized test scores). Second,
we examine how the program effects change over time and
across students with different academic and family back-
grounds.Third,weexaminethespilloversofamath-focused
CALprogramonstudentacademicperformanceinothersub-
jects (in our case, language class). Finally, we investigate the
impacts of CAL on non-academic student outcomes, an ef-
fect that has almost never been reported in the literature.
Specifically, we examine the effect of the CAL intervention
on the interest that students have in learning; student self-
confidence;andself-eﬃcacy instudying.
To meet this goal, in this paper we present the results of
a randomized field experiment of a CAL program involving
over 4000 third-grade students, mostly aged 9 and 10, from
poor migrant families, in 43 migrant schools in Beijing. Mi-
grant schools are private-run for-profit schools specifically
serving migrant children. These schools are unregulated by
thestateandaretypicallythoughttoprovidelowqualityedu-
cation. Urban residents never send their children to migrant
schools. Students in migrant schools are vulnerable in the
sense that their teachers are busy and underpaid and almost
never offer out of class tutoring; parents of the students are
often poor and inadequately educated and, thus, can neither
afford commercial tutoring nor are they able to effectively
tutor theirownchildren.
Whileourresearchdesignforcomputer-assistedlearning
is similar in many ways to Banerjee et al. (2007) and Linden
(2008),thereremainseveraldifferences.Themostimportant
feature of our research design is that we include an addi-
tionalsetofcontrolschoolstodetectanyprogramspillovers
onto the control group. Second, we used within school (be-
tween class) randomization to both eliminate school-level
confoundinginfluencesandimprovetheeﬃciencyofthees-
timation.Third,ourCALprogramwasimplementedoutofthe
regular school hours and thus was able to avoid any down-
ward bias of the estimation of the treatment effect due to
substitutioneffects.
Our results show that a remedial CAL program held out
of regular school hours improved the student standardized
mathscoresby0.15standarddeviationsandmostofthepro-
gram effect took place within 2 months after the start of
the program. Students with less-educated parents benefited
more from the program. The CAL program also significantly
increasedtheinterestofstudentsinlearning.Weobserveno
significant spillovers of CAL program in math onto Chinese
language test scores. Our results are also shown to be robust
tothe potentialthreatsof theprogramspillovers.
Therestofthepaperisorganizedasfollows.Thefirstsec-
tionbrieflylaysoutthecontextofthestudy—migrantschools
and migrant education in Beijing. The next section reviews
thestudy’sapproach,includingtheresearchdesignandsam-
pling,anexplanationoftheintervention,adescriptionofthe
data and an explanation of the statistical approach. The fol-
lowing sections present the results, discuss the findings and
conclude.
2. Migrant schools and migrant education in Beijing
As China’s economy has grown over the past 30 years,
the number of rural-to-urban migrants has increased to
36 F.Laiet al./Economicsof EducationReview47(2015)34–48
150 million, among which, 20 million are children of school
age (All-China Women’s Federation, 2008; Sa, 2004). As ur-
ban public schools can only accommodate a small fraction
of migrant children, limited space and steep out-of-district
school-access fees unaffordable to many migrant families,
compel most migrant children to attend for-profit schools
that specifically serve children from poor migrant families
(migrant schools). The students in these migrant schools are
exclusively migrant children—no urban children enroll in
these schools. In Beijing it is estimated that 70% of migrant
childrenattendmigrantschools(Tao& Yang,2007).
Migrantschoolsoftenhavepoorfacilities,under-qualified
and unmotivated teachers with high job turnover and frag-
mented curricula (CCAP, 2009; Ding, 2004; Han, 2004;
Human Rights Watch, 2006; Kwong, 2004; Liu, 2002; Ma,
Bai, Liu, Pang, & Rozelle, 2008). Due to their private nature,
migrant schools are often unacknowledged by the munici-
pal government and rarely receive any support (Han, 2004;
Kwong, 2004). Worse still, these schools are often transient,
withsuddenclosingsduetoanythingfromhavingtheirleases
pulled because of rebuilding projects to local regulation vio-
lations.Thistransiencediscourageslong-terminvestmentin
these schools. The poor quality of facilities and under quali-
fied teachers have almost certainly created an environment
in which migrant children are underperforming education-
ally (e.g.; Lai et al., 2011; Song, Loyalak, & Wei, 2010). For
example, Lai et al. (2014) found that after controlling for in-
dividual and family backgrounds, students in public schools
stilloutperformedonacademicteststhoseinmigrantschools
by around 12 points on a 0–100 scale. Moreover, the longer
migrant children stayed in migrant schools, the worse their
performancewas.
Improving educational quality and student performance
in migrant schools has important implications for the chil-
dren of China’s 150 million migrant workers now and in the
future as the migrant population continues to grow. When
children of well-off families fall behind in study, their par-
ents can either send them to commercial remedial tutoring
programs,ortheparentsthemselvesalmostalwaysmakeef-
fortstoassisttheirchildrenintheircoursework.Theirschools
andteachersalsocanhelpthemcatchupviavariousschool-
sponsored, remedial tutoring programs. However, migrant
students do not have the above privileges. According to our
survey data, only 13% of the migrant parents have a high
school diploma, and they are too poor to afford commercial
remedial tutoring services. Moreover, migrant school teach-
ers are rarely competent and often lack the motivation and
dedicationthat isneededto helptheirstudents.
Tofocusourstudyondistrictswheremigrantschoolsare
most concentrated, we restricted our sample to the three
districts in Beijing. These three districts are the areas of
Beijing most densely populated by migrants and migrant
schools. Of the 230 migrant schools in Beijing, 69 schools
were in these three districts. Therefore, our sample can be
considered to be representative of the children of migrant
families—most of whom are relatively poor, compared to
the average urban household—who attend migrant schools.
Other migrant families have put their children into urban
publicschools.Oursampleisnotrepresentativeoftheclassof
families/studentsthatareinurbanpublicschools.However,it
shouldbenotedthatthemajorityofmigrantchildreninChina
attendmigrantschools(Laietal.,2011).Webelieveoursam-
ple is reasonably representative of migrant schools across
China, which suffer from poor facilities and teachers, and
whose students often do not receive remedial care at home.
What is more, given that similar shortcomings appear to be
commoninpoorschoolsoutsideofChina,suchasthoseinru-
ral India (Muralidharan & Kremer, 2006) and rural Indonesia
(Newhouse & Beegle, 2006) our sample may also serve as a
usefulframeofreferenceforstrugglingschoolsinotherLDCs
or underserved neighborhoods in developed countries. In
summary,webelieveourstudyisusefulingaugingtheeffec-
tivenessofcomputer-assistedlearninginschoolswherepoor
studentslackhighqualityteachersandfacilities,andhavelit-
tle assistancewithschoolworkfrom theirparentsathome.
Havingidentifiedoursampleframe,wethenproceededto
excludeschoolsthathadonlyoneclasspergradeatthegrade
3 level. In total, 43 schools met the criteria of having two or
more grade 3 classes. Our power calculations, however, re-
quired that we only needed 24 classes in each of the two
groups(thetreatmentandcontrolgroups)inthe24schools.1
Therefore,ofthe43schoolsinthesampleframe,werandomly
chose24schoolsasoursampleschools(Fig.1).Therestofthe
schools—19 of them—while excluded from being part of the
CAL intervention, were kept as an additional control group
which we use to check the robustness of our empirical re-
sults regarding possible program spillovers (described more
below).
Because the math CAL software we used was only avail-
able at the third grade level, we only examined third-grade
students in our sample schools. All of the third-grade stu-
dents in the 24 sample schools were included in the study
(although only one class in each school received the CAL in-
tervention).Intotal,therewere2514third-gradestudentsin
54classes,approximately47studentsperclassinthe24core
sample schools (Fig. 1). There were more than 48 classes in
the 24 core sample schools because five schools had three
classesandoneschoolhadfour.
Althoughthecoresampleatthebaselinesurveyincluded
a total of 24 schools and 2514 students, there was some
3. Sampling, data and methods
3.1. Sampling andthe processofrandomization
We conducted a clustered (at the class level) RCT of CAL
inBeijingmigrantschoolsinthefallsemesterof2010.Atotal
of 4103 students in 98 classes of 43 Beijing migrant schools
are involved in our study. Among them, 2514 students in
55classesof24schoolsconstitutethemainsample.Theother
schools/classesserveasadditionalcontrolstocheckforintra-
schoolspilloversandprogramspillovers.
1 In the multi-site cluster randomized trial, within each site (school) we
randomly assigned one class to treatment group and the other classes to
control group. We calculated that we require 45 individuals per class and
24 classes per group to detect a standardized effect size for the outcome
variable of 0.25 with 85% power at the 5% significance level. We assumed
an intra-cluster correlation of 0.25, a pre- and post-intervention correlation
of 0.5, 60% reduction in the between-class variation by blocking on school
aﬃliations, the variability in effect sizes equal to 0.01 and a 15% loss to
follow-up.
F. Laiet al./EconomicsofEducationReview47 (2015)34–48 37
43 migrant schools in Beijing
19 migrant schools
randomly excluded
Baseline (Sept. 2010)
24 schools were randomly selected; all third grade students in
these schools are included in the sample (2514 students)
Within each school, one class was randomly selected to receive the CAL intervention,
leaving the other class (classes) as control group(s).
Allocation
(Sept 2010)
30 classes allocated to the
Control group (1447 students)
24 classes allocated to the
treatment group (1067 students)
Follow-up (midterm
and final evaluation;
November
&December 2010)
Attrition: 86 students
Attrition: 59 students
Analysis
1361 students
analyzed
1008 students analyzed
Fig. 1. Experimentprofile.
attritionbytheendofthestudy.Forvariousreasons(mainly
school transfers and extended absences due to illness or in-
juries),bythetimeoftheevaluationsurveywewereonlybe
able to follow up with 1361 in the control classes and 1008
students in the treatment classes in the 24 sample schools
(Fig.1,finalrow).Inotherwords,2369outoftheinitial2514
students were included in our evaluation survey and were
partofthesubsequentstatisticalanalysis,implyingamoder-
ateattritionrateof6%.Boys,olderstudentsandstudentswith
lowerChinesebaselinetestscoresattritedathigherratesthan
other students (Table 1, column 1). Compared with students
thatdidnotattrite,attritionstudentshadmoreaccesstosome
othertypesofelectronictechnology,suchasamobilephone.
Fortunately, not only is the attrition rate low, but it also
appears to be independent of the assignment of the CAL in-
tervention, and thus unlikely to either reduce the validity of
our research design or bias our results. As shown in the fi-
nal row of Fig. 1, the attrition is evenly distributed between
thetreatmentandcontrolgroups.Theattritionrateisaround
6% for both the control group and the treatment group. The
difference in the attrition rate between these two groups is
not statistically significant. In other words, students did not
leave the sample because they were or were not assigned to
thetreatment/controlgroups.Furthermore,whencomparing
the attrition students in the treatment group to those in the
controlgroup,wefoundtheyhadsimilarcharacteristics.This
suggeststhat,ingeneral,thefactorsleadingtoattritionwere
largelythe samefor bothgroups.
After choosing the 24 schools for the core sample, the
first step of our study was to randomly select one class in
each sample school to receive the CAL intervention. Hence,
our research team randomly selected one third grade class
in each of the 24 program schools to receive the CAL inter-
vention (the treatment group), leaving the rest of the third
grade classes in each school to serve as the control group. In
this way, the baseline student characteristics were balanced
betweenstudentsinthecontrolclassesandthoseinthetreat-
mentclasses.Therawandwithin-schooldifferencesbetween
the treatment and control groups were not only statistically
insignificant for all student characteristics but also small in
magnitudeinmost cases(Table2,columns 7and8).
3.2. Experiment arms/interventions
Excluding the 19 control schools, whose principals were
never informed of the CAL intervention in the other 24 CAL
sample schools, our experiment focused fully on one group
of treatment classes and one group of control classes in the
sameschool.
38 F.Laiet al./Economicsof EducationReview47(2015)34–48
Table 1
Comparisonsofthestudentcharacteristicsbetweentheattritedstudentsandthoseremaininginthesampleandthecharacteristicsof
attrited studentsbetweenthe treatment and control groupsinthe 24 program schools.
Sample:sample+attritionobservationsc Sample:attritionobservationse
Within-school difference Within-school difference
(nonattrition–attrition)d (2) (treatment–control)f (1)
(1) Baselinemathscore (units ofstandard
0.25 0.01
deviation)a
(2) BaselineChinesescore(unitsofstandard
0.28∗∗∗ 0.09
deviation)a
(3) Age(number ofyears)−0.28∗∗∗
−0.26
(4) Female(1= yes;0= no) 0.15∗∗∗ 0.08
(5) Everusedacomputer(1= yes;0= no) 0.06−0.11
(6) Accessto othermoderntechnologiesb
−0.05∗∗
−0.03
(7) Livingwithfather(1= yes;0= no) 0.04−0.02
(8) Livingwithmother(1= yes;0= no) 0.03−0.06
(9) #ofsiblings−0.21 0.24
(10) Fatherhas highschool orcollegedegree
0.00 0.03
(1= yes;0= no)
(11) Motherhashighschoolorcollegedegree
−0.02−0.05
(1= yes;0= no)
(12) School dummies Y Y
(13) Observations 2369 145
Source: Authors’survey.
Robuststandard errors clustered atthe class level.
a The baseline math/Chinese score is the score on the standardized math/Chinese test that was given to all students in the sample
before the CAL program.
b Access to other modern technologies is the mean value of a set of 0/1 dummy variables including whether the student has used
cell phone, Internet, game console,CAL software,and videosfor learningassistance.
c The sampleincludeboth the sampleobservations(non-attrition) and the attrition observations.
d The within-school differences between the attrition and non-attrition observations are calculated by regressions of the row
variablesonthe dummyvariableofnon-attrition, controllingforschool dummyvariables.
e The sampleislimitedto the attrited observations.
f The within-school difference between the treatment and control group is calculated by regressions of the row variables on the
treatment dummyvariable, controllingforschool dummyvariables.
∗∗ Significantat5%.
∗∗∗ Significantat 1%.
3.2.1. CALintervention group (the treatment group)
The main intervention involved computer-assisted math
remedial tutoring sessions which were designed to comple-
ment the regular in-class math curriculum for the Fall 2010
semester. Under the supervision of one teacher–supervisor
trained by our research group, the students in the treat-
ment group had two 40-min CAL sessions per week during
lunch break or after school, thus serving as a supplement to
the regular in-school instruction hours. The sessions were
mandatory and attendance was taken by the teacher–
supervisors.Toavoidinfluencefromteachersthatmightcon-
found our estimation of the effect of CAL intervention, none
oftheteacher–supervisorsweremathteachersorthehome-
room teachers of the third-grade students. The content—
instructional videos and games—of each session was exactly
the same for all students in all 24 treatment classes and em-
phasized basic competencies in the uniform national math
curriculum. In short, the material was remedial in nature;
was based on the material that was in student textbooks;
and was material taught the same week. The teacher had no
discretiononwhatwastaughtintheCAL lessons.
During each session, two students shared one computer
and played animation-based math games designed to help
students review and practice the basic math material that
was being taught in their regular school math classes. When
playingthegames,thestudentsfirstworkedoutthesolutions
with pencils/pens on scratch paper and then submitted the
answers using the keyboards and mice of their computers. If
a student had a math-related question, he/she was encour-
aged to discuss with his/her teammate (the one with whom
he/she shared the computer). The students were not sup-
posed to consult the other teams or the teacher–supervisor.
According to our protocol, the teachers were only allowed
to help students withscheduling,computer hardwareissues
andsoftwareoperations.Infact,inourobservations,theses-
sionsweresointensethattheattentionofthestudentswere
fully on the computer and, while there was a lot of inter-
actionbetweenthemembersofthetwo-personteams,there
waslittlecommunicationsamongthegroupsorbetweenany
of thegroupsandtheteacher–supervisor.
3.2.2. CALcontrolgroup(the controlgroup inthe coresample)
Students in the classes that were assigned to the control
group (all classes in the 24 program schools, except for the
classes which received the CAL intervention) did not receive
any CAL intervention. Following the protocol, they were not
allowedtoaccessthecomputers.Theywerealsonotallowed
to use the software. To our knowledge, no one except for
the students in the CAL treatment group and their teacher–
supervisorsusedthe computersfor anypurpose.
To eliminate confounding influences from school visits
paid only to the treatment group during the CAL sessions, as
Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011) did in their RCT on
teacher performance pay, every time our volunteers visited
F. Laiet al./EconomicsofEducationReview47 (2015)34–48 39
Table 2
the 24program schools.
Comparison of student and family characteristics and student access to computer and other modern technologies between the treatment and control groups in
Treatment (1008obs) Control (1361 obs) The raw difference Within-school differencec
(treatment–control) (treatment–control)
Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
(1) Age(number ofyears) 8.53 0.87 8.49 0.88 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.03
(2) Female(1= yes;0= no) 0.46 0.50 0.45 0.50 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.02
(3) Baselinemathscore (unitsofstandard
0.03 0.97 0.00 1.00 0.03 0.06 0.04 0.04
deviation)a
(4) BaselineChinese score (unitsof
−0.03 1.00 0.00 1.00−0.03 0.09 0.00 0.05
standard deviation)a
(5) Accessto other moderntechnologiesb 0.50 0.27 0.48 0.26 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.02
(6) Livingwithfather(1= yes;0= no) 0.88 0.33 0.88 0.33 0.00 0.02−0.00 0.01
(7) Livingwithmother(1= yes;0= no) 0.93 0.26 0.92 0.27 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
(8) #ofsiblings 1.65 1.72 1.77 2.08−0.12 0.10−0.09 0.08
(9) Everusedacomputer(1= yes;0= no) 0.49 0.50 0.54 0.50−0.04 0.04−0.04 0.03
(10) Fatherhas acollegedegree(1= yes;
0.02 0.14 0.02 0.13 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00
0= no)
(11) Fatherhas ahighschool degree(1=
0.12 0.33 0.12 0.33 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01
yes;0= no)
(12) Motherhas acollegedegree(1= yes;
0.01 0.11 0.01 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
0= no)
(13) Motherhas ahighschool degree(1=
0.08 0.27 0.08 0.27−0.01 0.01−0.00 0.01
yes;0= no)
Source:Authors’ survey.
∗∗ Significantat5%.∗∗∗ Significantat1%.
a The baselinemath/Chinese score isthe score onthe standardizedmath/Chinese testthat wasgivento allstudentsinthe samplebefore the CAL program.
b Access to other modern technologies is the mean value of a set of 0/1 dummy variables including whether the student has used cell phone, Internet, game
console, CALsoftware, and videosforlearning assistance.
c The within-school difference between the treatment and control groups is calculated by regressions of each of the row variables on the treatment dummy
variable, controllingforschool dummyvariables,withrobuststandard errors clustered atthe class level.
the program school and audited the CAL session, they also
audited classes in the control group. Therefore, the control
groups were visited the same number of times as the treat-
mentgroups.
3.2.3. Additional controlgroup
There is one more additional control group in our study
design.Itispossiblethatwecannotrelyonthecontrolgroup
(control classes in the same school as the treatment classes)
alone because the randomization is within each program
school and students (in the control classes) might be neg-
ativelyaffectedbythetreatment.Tobemorespecificwithan
example of what might happen, the students in the control
classesmightobservestudentsofthetreatmentclassesinthe
samegradehavingCALsessionstwiceaweekwhiletheyjust
had regular school sessions as usual. This observation alone
mightaffecttheirefforts/motivationandthustheiracademic
outcomes. In fact, there could have been positive spillovers,
too. By interacting with students in the treatment classes,
thestudentsinthecontrolclassesmightalsoindirectlylearn
from the CAL sessions. With this positive spillover, the test
scores of students in the control group might also increase,
generating a downward bias of the estimate of the CAL pro-
gram effect. To disentangle these spillovers from the true
effect of the CAL program, we included a set of pure control
schoolsthatdidnotknowoftheCALprogram,andthuswere
unaffectedbytheprogramspilloversintoouranalyticsample.
To measure if there was any possible bias from the pro-
gram spillovers or if there were any spillovers, we also in-
cluded all third-grade students in the 19 schools that were
randomly excluded from the core sample as an additional
control group. To minimize their awareness of being part of
our study, for the students in this group, we only conducted
the standardized math and Chinese tests and collected data
onstudentandfamilycharacteristicsduringthebaselineand
final evaluation surveys. We did not pay any other visits to
these students or to their schools. None of the teachers or
students in these 19 schools were informed of the CAL pro-
gram and these schools did not have any contact with the
24 program schools in the core sample of our study. Conse-
quently,theCALinterventionintheprogramschoolswasun-
likely to affect these additional control schools via any form
of spillover.2 Comparisons of the changes in the academic
performance over the program period among the treatment
2 One might be concerned about possible “contamination” of the pure
control schools. For several reasons, we do not believe that this happened.
First, the schools are geographically dispersed. Second, all migrant schools
are independent—there is no association connecting them together. Third,
since migrant schools are private, for-profit entities, they are also competi-
tors. Thus, program schools had no incentive to tell non-program schools
about the CAL program. Finally, we directed principals and teachers of the
program schools to not talk about the program outside the school, or else
be at risk of elimination from the program. We believe under such circum-
stances, the possibilityof spillover of information about the program across
schoolsisminimal.
40 F.Laiet al./Economicsof EducationReview47(2015)34–48
group, control group (the control classes in the 24 program
schools), and the additional control group can inform us of
thesignificanceandsizeof theprogramspillovers.
3.3. Datacollection
The research group conducted a total of three rounds of
a survey of each third-grade student in the 24 schools in
our main sample, and two rounds of a survey for all third-
graders in the 19 additional control schools. The first-round
surveywasabaselinesurveyconductedwithallthirdgraders
in the 43 schools in early September 2010 at the beginning
of the Fall semester and before any implementation of CAL
program had begun. The second-round survey was a mid-
line evaluation survey conducted only with third graders in
the24programschoolsinthemiddleofthesemesterinearly
November.Thethird-roundsurveywasafinalevaluationsur-
vey conductedatthe endof theprograminlateDecember,a
timethat coincidedwiththeendoftheFallsemester.
In each round of survey, the enumeration team visited
each school and conducted a two-block survey. In the first
block students were given a standardized math test and a
standardizedChinesetest.3
In the second block enumerators collected data on the
characteristics of students and their families. From this part
of the survey we are able to create demographic and socioe-
conomic variables. The dataset includes measures of each
student’s age (measured in years), gender (described by an
indicator female, which is equal to one for girls, and zero for
boys), how many siblings they had (or number of siblings),
father’seducation level(father has a collegedegree andfather
hasahighschooldegree),andmother’seducationlevel(mother
has a college degree and mother has a high school degree). To
create indicators of parental care, during the survey the stu-
dentswerealsoaskedwhethertheylivedwitheitheroftheir
parents for most of the time during the semester (living with
father andliving with mother).
Importantly,inthesecondblockstudentswerealsoasked
to answer questions that could help us measure their non-
cognitivetraits,suchastheirattitudestowardschooling,the
levels of self-confidence and self-eﬃcacy of math studying
(i.e. one’s belief in their ability to excel in math and problem
solving). To create the indicator depicting the student’s atti-
tude toward schooling (like school), the students were asked
to rate their attitude toward school on a 0–10 scale, where
“0”indicates“extremelyhateschool”and“10”indicates“ex-
tremely enjoy school.” The indicators of self-confidence and
self-eﬃcacy of math studying were created from the re-
sponsesofstudentsinaten-itempsychologicalscalemeasur-
ing self-confidence 4; and a seven-item psychological scale
for self-eﬃcacyof mathstudying.5
For the baseline survey only, information about the ac-
cess of students to computers and other modern technolo-
gies (such as mobile phones) was collected. The information
collected inthissub-blockof thesurvey allowedusto create
variables that include whether the students had ever used a
computer and whether they had access to other modern tech-
nologies.
3.4. Statistical methods
To estimate how the academic and non-academic out-
comeschangedinthetreatmentgrouprelativetothecontrol
group, we run an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) model, re-
gressing the outcome variables (i.e. post-program outcome
value) on the baseline value of the outcome variable and a
dummy variable of the treatment (CAL intervention) status,
controlling for the school fixed effects and a set of control
variables. As randomization was conducted within schools
acrossclasses,wecontrolledfortheschoolfixedeffectstodis-
entangle the systematic within-school differences between
the treatment and control classes in yisc and obtain an un-
biased estimate of the genuine treatment effect of the CAL
intervention.Weincludedothercontrolvariablestoimprove
the eﬃciency of the estimation. In all regressions, we ac-
countedfortheclusterednatureofoursamplebyconstruct-
ing Huber–White standard errors corrected for class-level
clustering (relaxing the assumption that disturbance terms
are independent and identically distributed within classes).
To bemorespecifically,our modelis:
yisc = α + β· treatmentc + ss + θ· y0isc + Xiscγ + εisc (1)
where yisc is the endline (or midterm in some cases) out-
comevariableforchildiinschoolsandclassc,treatmentc isa
dummyvariableforastudentattendingaclassassignedtothe
treatment group (equal to one for students in the treatment
group and zero otherwise), ss is the vector of school fixed
effects, y0isc is the pre-program (baseline) outcome value for
student i in school s and class c, Xisc is a vector of additional
controlvariables,andɛisc isarandomdisturbanceterm(clus-
tered attheclasslevel).
We used several variables to measure the student aca-
demic and non-academic outcomes (yisc). The primary out-
come variable of our analysis is the student academic out-
come,measuredbythestudentstandardizedmathtestscore.
3 Some experts from the Center for Examination of Beijing helped us
picked questions for the tests from oﬃcial examination books and exercise
books. The math test included 29–32 questions (tests in different rounds
includedslightlydifferentnumbersofquestions).TheChinesetestincluded
30–35 questions. Students were required to finish test in each subject in
25 min. All students took the math test first and then they took the Chinese
test.Ourenumerationteammonitoredthetestandstrictlyenforcedthetime
limitsandtriedtomakesuretherewasnocheating.Weusethescoresofthe
studentsonthemathandChinesetestsasourmeasuresofstudentacademic
performance.
4 Self-confidence(alsocalledself-eﬃcacyinthepsychologicalliterature)
isaperson’sperceptionoftheirabilitytoplanandtakeactiontoreachapar-
ticular goal. “The construct of perceived self-eﬃcacy reflects an optimistic
self-belief” (Schwarzer, 1992). Perceived self-eﬃcacy is an operative con-
struct, i.e., it is related to subsequent behavior and, therefore, is relevant
for clinical practice and behavior change. Jerusalem and Schwartzer devel-
opedtheGeneralSelf-EﬃciencyScale(GSE)in1979,whichwasthenwidely
employed in measuring self-eﬃcacy. GSE has 10 items. Each item refers to
successfulcopingandimpliesaninternal-stableattributionofsuccess.Inour
study, we adopted the Chinese adaption of the GSE developed in Zhang and
Schwarzer(1995).
5 To measure the self-eﬃcacy of math studying, a professor in psycho-
metrics and measurement in Beijing Normal University helped us choose
among the 12 indicators of math attitudes used in TIMSS 2003 and devel-
opedaseven-itemscaleofself-eﬃcacyofmathstudyingthatisappropriate
to use underthe context ofelementaryschoolsinChina.
F. Laiet al./EconomicsofEducationReview47 (2015)34–48 41
WealsoincludedthestudentstandardizedChinesetestscore
as an additional academic outcome measure. By doing so,
we could examine if there were any positive or negative
spillovers of the CAL intervention to the student academic
performance in Chinese, the other major subject in China’s
elementary schools besides math.6 Importantly, besides
variables measuring academic outcomes, we also included
threenon-academicoutcomevariables,namely,thestudent’s
level of self-confidence, like school and self-eﬃcacy of math
studying.
The variables in Xisc are student and family characteris-
tics (female, age, number of siblings, father has a college/high
school degree, mother has a college/high school degree, living
with father and living with mother) and the student access
to computer and other technical device before the program
started(everusedacomputerandaccesstoothermoderntech-
nologies).
By construction, β equals the average within-school dif-
ferenceinyisc betweenthetreatmentandcontrolgroupscon-
ditional on y0isc (or β measures the within-school difference
in changes in the outcome variable between the treatment
and control groups over the program period). As the CAL in-
tervention was randomly assigned within schools, β is an
unbiasedestimateoftheeffectofbeingassignedtothetreat-
mentgroup(i.e.,theeffectoftheCALintervention,ortheCAL
treatmenteffect).ByincludingXisc asadditionalcontrolvari-
ables,β isanunbiased,eﬃcientestimateoftheCALtreatment
effect.
4. Results
4.1. MaineffectoftheCALinterventiononstudentperformance
The multivariate regression analyses show that the esti-
mated CAL treatment effect on math test scores is equal to
0.15standarddeviations(Table3,row1,column1)andissig-
nificant at the 0.01 level. Considering that the program only
ran for one semester, the size of the CAL program effect is
comparable to the findings in other CAL evaluations that ob-
servedbeneficialeffectsofCALonstudentperformance(e.g.,
Banerjeeetal.,2007;Barrowetal., 2008;Linden,2008).7,8
Most of the positive effect of the CAL intervention on
standardized math test scores took place within the first
2 months of the program implementation. Since the CAL
program was launched in early September, its effect quickly
reached0.15standarddeviationsbymidterm(earlyNovem-
ber; Appendix A, row 1, column 2). This pattern of results
is similar to those found in Banerjee et al. (2007) who find
that the large impacts came early in the program’s imple-
mentation period. Although the impact did not continue
to rise during the second period of the study, this effect
persisted over the whole semester (by comparing Table 3,
row 1, column 1 and Appendix A, row 1, column 2). In this
way, our findings are different from the findings in Banerjee
et al. (2007), which found even larger impact of CAL inter-
ventionduringthesecondphaseof CAL program.
One possible explanation of the absence of further gains
during the second period is that there was a fall in the level
of excitement about the program. To examine this ques-
tion, we can look at changes in non-cognitive outcomes
over the course of the project (during first and second pe-
riod). The three non-cognitive variables are: like school;
self-confidence; and self-eﬃcacy. Using our data, we ran re-
gressions that examined the change of these outcomes over
time. The results are in Appendix B. There is no evidence
of decreasing “excitement” when measured using any of the
three measureable non-cognitive outcomes. The measures
of self-confidence and self-eﬃcacy do not fall; when we
measure “like school,” the rate actually significantly rises af-
ter the midterm. We did not observe significant increase in
“like school” between baseline and midterm (Appendix B,
column 1), but observed significant and large increase in
“like school” between baseline and endline (Appendix B,
column2).
Another possible reason for the absence of further gains
from CAL program during the second period is household
substitution.Dasetal.(2011)foundthatunanticipatedschool
grantsledtosignificantimprovementsinstudenttestscores
but anticipated grants had no impact on test scores. They
suggested that over time households would adjust their ed-
ucational inputs for their children in response to changes in
schoolinputs,thusoffsettingpartoftheimpactsofthe(antic-
ipated)schoolinputs.Itispossiblethatthismightalsoapply
toourCALprogram.Forthefirsthalfofthesemester,theCAL
program was unanticipated by the parents and thus parents
didnotrespondimmediately(thatis,theydidnotadjusttheir
educational input for their children). By the middle point of
the intervention, however, parents may have had time to
understandwhatwasgoingonandrealizedthattheCALpro-
gram would continue until the end of the semester. If they
believedthattheCALprogramwasdoingsomeofthingsthat
theyweredoingintheeveningswiththeirchildren,theymay
have adjusted their time input accordingly. In other words,
they might have believed that their children had enough
6 Forexample,theCALprogrammighthaveimprovedthestudent’sgen-
eral learning ability and thus the student Chinese test score might also in-
crease. The CAL program might have also taken up so much of the student’s
timeandenergyinlearningmaththatthestudenthadlesstimeandenergy
tospendonChinese.Inthiscase,theCALprograminmathmightnegatively
affect the studentacademicperformance inChinese.
7 It is possible that teacher effort responded to the CAL program. For
example, teachers may have taken advantage of the program and shirked
theirduties.Ifthiswerethecase,thelowereffortoftheteacherwouldhave
loweredtheobservedimpactoftheCALprogram.Unfortunately,inourdata
set there is no reliable data of the level of teacher effort. Because of the
absence of data, we cannot rule out this possibility. However, even if this
were the case, our estimate of the CAL impact would be a “lower-bound”
estimate. Hence, we still would have to a highly significant finding even
after accounting for any confounding influence from the effect of teacher
freeriding.IntheendwewouldstillbeabletosaythatCALcouldprovidean
effectiveremedyto the underperformance ofstudentsinmigrant schools.
8 Oneissueofpotentialinterestiswhetherourresultsarebeingdrivenby
strategic switching (that is, are better students jumping into the treatment
classes,perhapsattheexpenseofpoorperformingstudent?).Wedonotbe-
lievesoforseveralreasons.First,wedonotobserveanyswitchingofclasses
aftertheintervention.Inotherwords,nostudentsswitchedfromthecontrol
classtotreatmentclassorviceversa.Second,wedonotincludestudentswho
switched into the program schools after the start of the semester into our
analytic sample as we do not have baseline data for these students. Finally,
in most cases, migrant students switched schools for reasons irrelevant to
CAL(e.g.theirparentschangedjobssotheyhadtomovetoanothercommu-
nity). Thus, there was no evidence of strategic switching of classes/schools
inresponseto the CAL intervention.
42 F.Laiet al./Economicsof EducationReview47(2015)34–48
Table 3
Ordinary LeastSquares estimatorsofthe impactsofCAL program onstudentoutcomesinthe 24program schools.
Standardizedmath StandardizedChinese Like-school Self-confidence Self-eﬃcacyin
testscore testscore (0–10) (1–4) mathstudying
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) Treatment (1= the treatment
group;0= the control group)
0.15∗∗∗ 0.01 0.31∗∗ 0.07−0.00
(0.04) (0.05) (0.15) (0.05) (0.03)
Y Y Y Y Y
(2) Baselinevalue ofthe outcome
variable
(3) School dummyvariablesand other
Y Y Y Y Y
control variables
(4) Observations 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369
(5) R-squared 0.39 0.39 0.10 0.20 0.14
Source:Authors’ survey.
Robuststandard errors inbrackets, clusteredatthe classlevel.
Each column reports the results of one regression of the student outcome variable (corresponding to the column title) on the treatment dummy variable,
controllingfor the baselinevalue ofthe outcomevariable,the school dummyvariablesand other control variables.
Other control variables include the student age, female (1= yes; 0= no), baseline math/Chinese score, ever used a computer (1= yes; 0= no), access to other
modern technologies, living with father (1= yes; 0= no), living with mother (1= yes; 0= no), # of siblings, father has college degree (1= yes; 0= no), father
hashigh school degree(1= yes;0= no), motherhas collegedegree(1= yes;0= no), motherhas highschool degree(1= yes; 0= no).
∗∗ Significant at5%.
∗∗∗ Significantat1%.
tutoring via the CAL program at school and thus reduced the
timeandefforttheyspentontutoringtheirchildrenathome.
If the household substitution is part of the reason for the
leveling off of the impact, we might expect to observe two
patterns in the change of student test scores over time. First,
weshouldexpecttoobservestrongerhouseholdsubstitution
effects for students whose parents had higher levels of edu-
cationandwereinabetterpositiontobeprovidingin-home
tutoringhelpfortheirchildrenintheabsenceoftheCALpro-
gram.9 Second,thefirstpatternwouldbeexpectedtoemerge
onlyafterthemidtermexambecauseparentswereonlyable
toeffectivelyrespondtotheunexpectedCALprogramsome-
timeafteritsimplementation(forexample,aboutthetimeof
the midline evaluation when they observed improvement in
thestudent midtermtest scores).
The results of our regression analysis are consistent with
theassumptionofhouseholdsubstitution.Beforethemidline
evaluation survey, students whose fathers had higher levels
of education did not gain less from the treatment than those
who did not (Appendix A, rows 2 and 3, columns 3 and 4).
However,after the midlineevaluationsurvey (by comparing
student test scores between endline and baseline), students
whosefatherhadhigherlevelsofeducationgainedlessfrom
the treatment than those who did not (0.20 standard devia-
tionslessforstudentswhosefatherhadatleastahighschool
degree and 0.35 standard deviations less for those whose fa-
ther had a college degree; row 2, columns 8 and 9, Table 4).
This result implies that there is a possible household sub-
stitution occurring after the onset of the CAL program, when
parentswerewellawareoftheCALprogramandwasstronger
amongparentswhowerewelleducatedandmoreabletotu-
tor theirchildrenintheabsenceof theCAL program.
Unfortunately, we do not have any direct empirical evi-
dencethatsubstitutionofhiredtutoringservicesorparental
effort at home is occurring. From responses to survey ques-
tions about after-school tutoring activities,10 we do not ob-
serveanysignificantdifferencesintheamountofafter-school
tutoring/help with study at home between treatment and
control groups (results not shown for brevity). We also do
notobserveanydifferenceintheamountoftutoringreceived
outside of school (or amount of help received at home) dur-
ingtheevaluationpartofthesurveybetweentreatmentand
control classes for students with fathers that have different
levelsofeducation.Inregressionsthatexaminewhetherpar-
entswithhigherlevelsofeducationreducedeffortsinhelping
students at home in treatment classes, we see that none of
thecoeﬃcientsontherelevantvariables—thatis,thosemade
up of an interaction between treatment and fathers’ educa-
tion(highschool/college)—aresignificant(resultsnotshown
for brevity). Nonetheless, part of the reason for lack of direct
evidence of household substitution using student survey re-
sponses of parental tutoring might be that the true level of
parental tutoring/attention might not be properly measured
by surveyquestions tostudents.
The benefits of CAL program come at costs in several
dimensions. One major cost is the laptops; although the
program laptops were donated, each computer would cost
$100–$150 if we were to buy them on the market. On aver-
age, one computer serves six students. Assuming that the
laptops depreciate over 3 years, the per-student cost of
computers is $1.9–$2.8 during the program period. Another
major source of the program cost is compensation for the
teacher-supervisors.Onaverage,oneteacher-supervisorwas
inchargeof47students.Wepaideachteacher400yuan($59)
9 If the parents were poorly educated, they might not be able to input
theirtimetotutortheirchildren,eveniftheywantedto.Becauseofthis,the
substitutionofinputseffectinresponsetothechangeinschoolinput—inour
case, the CAL program, mightevenbe irrelevant forthese typesofparents.
10 We asked two questions during the evaluation surveys: (a) How many
times per week do you have after-school tutoring sessions (remedial or
advanced—typically in a commercial venue or in a teacher’s home, where
theteacherispaid)?(b)Howmanytimesperweekdoyoureceivehelpwith
your study after school inside your home (e.g., from your parents, siblings,
relatives or private tutors)? Overall, only 18% of the students in our sample
reported to have after-school tutoring sessions at least once per week; 34%
ofthestudentsinoursamplereportedtohavereceivedhelpwithstudyafter
school from parents (orother peopleinsidethe household)once perweek.
Table 4
The Ordinary LeastSquares estimatorsofthe heterogeneousprogram effectonstudentswithdifferentcharacteristics inthe 24program schools.
Dependent variable: standardized postCAL mathtest score
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13)
(1) Treatment
(1= the
treatment
group; 0=
the control
group)
(2) Interactions:
treatment∗
0.15∗∗∗ 0.15∗∗∗ 0.11 0.12∗∗ 0.22∗ 0.16 0.11∗∗ 0.15∗∗∗ 0.17∗∗∗ 0.15∗∗∗ 0.14∗∗∗ 0.20∗∗∗ 0.21∗∗∗
(0.04) (0.04) (0.41) (0.05) (0.13) (0.13) (0.05) (0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.05) (0.06) (0.07)
Baseline math
Baseline
score (units
Chinese
ofstandard
score (units
deviation)a
ofstandard
deviation)a
Age(number
ofyears)
Female(1=
yes; 0= no)
Living with
father (1=
yes; 0= no)
Living with
mother(1=
yes; 0= no)
# ofsiblings Father has a
college
degree (1=
yes; 0= no)
Father has a
high school
degree (1=
yes; 0= no)
Mother has a
Mother has a
college
high school
degree (1=
degree (1=
yes; 0= no)
yes; 0= no)
Everused a
computer
(1= yes;
0= no)
−0.03−0.05 0.00 0.05−0.09−0.01 0.02−0.35∗
−0.20∗
−0.41 0.06−0.10−0.12
(0.05) (0.04) (0.05) (0.07) (0.12) (0.12) (0.02) (0.20) (0.11) (0.26) (0.12) (0.07) (0.14)
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(3) Control
variables
(4) School
dummies
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
(5) Observations 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369
(6) R-squared 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39 0.39
Access toother
modern
technolo-
giesb
Source: Authors’ survey.
Robuststandard errorsinbrackets, clustered atthe class level.
Each columnreportsthe coeﬃcientsofthe treatment dummyvariable (inrow (1)) and the interaction ofthe treatmentdummyvariableand the correspondingstudentcharacteristics inrow(2) from one regression.
Eachregressionregressesthestudentpost-CALstandardizedmathscoreonthetreatmentdummyvariableandtheinteractionofthetreatmentdummyvariableandthecorrespondingstudentcharacteristicsinrow(2)
in that column,controlling forallthe studentcharacteristics inrow (2) and school fixedeffects(school dummies).
a The baselinemath/Chinese score isthe score onthe standardizedmath/Chinese test that wasgivento all studentsinthe samplebeforethe CALprogram.
b Accessto other moderntechnologiesisthe meanvalueofasetof0/1 dummyvariablesincludingwhetherthe studenthas usedcell phone,Internet, gameconsole,CAL software,and videosforlearningassistance.
∗ Significantat10%.
∗∗ Significantat5%.
∗∗∗ Significantat 1%.
F. Laiet al./EconomicsofEducationReview47 (2015)34–48 43
44 F.Laiet al./Economicsof EducationReview47(2015)34–48
per month. Therefore, the cost in teacher compensation was
$5 per student. In addition to the cost related to computers
andteacher–supervisorcompensation,themaintenancecost,
can be assumed to amount to $1 per student. The software
cost is negligible when averaged by the number of students.
Therefore, the total per-student cost of our CAL program is
$7.9–$8.8.Giventhattheaverageprogrameffectis0.14stan-
darddeviations,theCALprogramcosts$5.6–$6.3pertenthof
astandarddeviationimprovementinthestudent test score.
Although the CAL program might be costly when com-
pared with other programs (e.g. Banerjee et al., 2007), the
costeffectivenessofCALcouldbesubstantiallyimprovedifit
wereimplementedonalarge-scale,real-worldbasis.China’s
governmentalreadyhascommittedtomakevastinvestments
in the computing facilities in rural and urban public schools.
If these investments are not considered to be part of the CAL
costs, the cost effectiveness of CAL would increase. By pro-
ductivelyusingtheexistingcomputers,thecostofCALcould
bereducedtoaslowas$4.3pertenthofastandarddeviation.
Moreover,onecomputercaneasilyserveeightstudents,and
one teacher can readily manage 64 students when working
in a rotation shifts, which might further reduce the cost of
theCAL program.
4.2. Heterogeneous effectsofthe CALintervention on student
academic performance
The estimation results using Eq. (1), but including inter-
actiontermsbetweenthetreatmentvariableandcertainstu-
dentcharacteristicsshowthattheCALinterventionhadsome
heterogeneous program effects on the math test scores of
students with different family backgrounds (Table 4, row 2).
Compared to the students in the control group, students in
thetreatmentgroupwhosefathershadneverreceivedahigh
schooldiplomaandthosewhosefatherhadneverreceiveda
collegediplomaimproved0.20 standarddeviationsand0.35
standard deviations more in their math scores than those
whosefathersdid,respectively(row2,columns8and9).Al-
though this is understandable, it is important since it is one
of the goals of the CAL program to improvethe learningout-
comes of those students that do not have anyone at home
able to help them.11 At the same time, we find no signif-
icant evidence of CAL intervention heterogeneous program
effects for other student demographic and family character-
istics(gender,age,numberofsiblings,motherhasacollege/high
schooldegree,livingwith fatherandlivingwith mother),or for
the student baseline test scores, or for the students’ access
tocomputersandothertechnicaldevicesbeforetheprogram
began(row2, columns1–7and10–13).
elementary schools. Positive spillover might result from in-
creased interest in learning promoted by the CAL program;
negativespillovermightresultfromthecrowdingouteffects
of theCAL programinmath.
Over the program period, we observe no significant im-
provements in the standardized Chinese test scores for the
treatment group in comparison to the control group. The re-
sultsofourmultivariateregressionanalysisusingEq.(1)also
show that the estimated effect of the CAL intervention on
Chinese test scores is 0.01 standard deviations and insignifi-
cant (Table 3, column 2).12 All these results suggest that the
CALinterventioninmathdidnotcreatesignificantlypositive
spillovers in the Chinese test scores of the students. What is
perhapsmoreimportantisthatthereisnoevidencethatthe
CAL program improved math performance at the expense of
performanceinChinese.
4.4. Impact onnon-academic outcomes
CALinterventionnotonlyimprovedthestudentacademic
performance in math, the analysis demonstrates that there
are increases in nonacademic outcomes for students in the
treatmentgroup (Table3).Comparedtostudentsinthecon-
trolgroup,thestudentsinthetreatmentgroup“likedschool”
significantly more (column 3). On a scale of 0–10, the differ-
enceinimprovementinthescoreontheindicatorlikeschool
betweenthetreatmentandcontrolgroupswasequalto0.31
pointsandwassignificantatthe5%level.Moreover,students
in the treatment group also improved 0.07 points more on
a self-confidence assessment with a scale of 1–4 than those
inthecontrolgroup(column4;andthisdifferenceisweakly
significantat the10%level).
On the contrary, we do not find any significant effects
of the CAL intervention on self-reported math study eﬃcacy
(Table 3, column 5). One possible reason for CAL’s lack of ef-
fect on the student’s self-reported math study eﬃcacy is the
remedial nature13 of our CAL program. Due to its remedial
nature, our CAL program focused more on repeated exercise
ratherthancreativemathlearningandproblemsolving.Con-
sequently,althoughtheCALprogrammadethestudentslike
schoolbetteranddevelopstrongerself-confidenceingeneral
(possiblyviatheinterestinggame-basedCALexerciseswhich
ledtoimprovedtestscores),itmaynotmakethestudentsbe-
lieve that they are more capable in math problem solving in
general.
4.5. Robustness check
To examine whether our estimates of the CAL interven-
tionwerecontaminatedbythepotentialspilloversoftheCAL
4.3. Spilloversin Chinese languagetest score
In principle, the CAL program in math might generate
either positive or negative spillovers on student academic
performance in Chinese, the other major subject in China’s
11 As mentioned in Section 4.1, this pattern might also be due to the
highly possible household substitution effect. Yet whatever the reason for
this pattern is, overall, students with less educated parents benefit more
from the CAL program.
12 Given that the point estimate of the treatment effect is 0.01 standard
deviations, and given that the standard error of the point estimate is 0.05
standard deviations (with a normal approximation), the upper bound of
the treatment effect would be 0.01 plus 2 times 0.05 (the standard error).
This means that the upper bound of the estimate is equal to 0.11 standard
deviations. In other words, according to our estimates, we can rule out im-
provements larger than 0.11 standard deviations from the CAL intervention
for the Chinese languagesubject.
13 By“remedial”,wemeanmaterialthatwasinthestudents’textbookand
materialthatwasbeingtaughtthesameweek(notmaterialthatwastaught
inthe distantpast).
F. Laiet al./EconomicsofEducationReview47 (2015)34–48 45
Table 5
OrdinaryLeastSquaresanalysisofthedifferenceinchangeinacademicperformanceovertheprogramperiodbetweenthecontrolgroup(thecontrol
classes in the 24 program schools) or treatment group in the core sample and the additional control group (the 19 schools excluded from our core
sample).
Dependentvariables:standardizedpostCAL score Math Chinese Math Chinese
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(1)“Treatment” dummy (1= "treatment": core samplecontrol group forcolumns1
and 2/core sampletreatment group forcolumns3and 4;
0= additionalcontrol group)
0.08 0.08 0.21∗∗∗ 0.11
(0.06) (0.07) (0.07) (0.07)
Control variables
(2)Baselinemath score (unitsofstandard deviation)a 0.41∗∗∗ 0.17∗∗∗ 0.42∗∗∗ 0.16∗∗∗
(0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03)
(3)BaselineChinese score (unitsofstandard deviation)a 0.25∗∗∗ 0.42∗∗∗ 0.23∗∗∗ 0.46∗∗∗
(0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03)
(4)Age (numberofyears)−0.07∗∗∗
−0.10∗∗∗
−0.07∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
(0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)
(5)Female(1= yes;0= no)−0.06 0.28∗∗∗
−0.05 0.25∗∗∗
(0.03) (0.03) (0.04) (0.04)
(6)Everusedacomputer(1= yes;0= no) 0.13∗∗∗ 0.15∗∗∗ 0.09∗∗ 0.14∗∗∗
(0.03) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
(7)Accessto other moderntechnologies(1= yes;0= no)b
−0.03−0.19∗∗∗
−0.07−0.18∗∗∗
(0.06) (0.05) (0.07) (0.06)
(8)Father hasacollegedegree(1= yes; 0= no) 0.21∗∗ 0.06 0.06 -0.06
(0.09) (0.11) (0.11) (0.11)
(9)Father hasahigh schooldegree(1= yes;0= no) 0.08 0.02−0.02−0.00
(0.05) (0.05) (0.06) (0.05)
(10)Motherhas acollegedegree(1= yes;0= no) 0.09−0.14 0.08−0.17
(0.13) (0.14) (0.15) (0.16)
(11) Motherhasahigh schooldegree (1= yes;0= no)−0.07 0.00 0.01 0.07
(0.05) (0.06) (0.07) (0.07)
(12) Observations (13) R-squared 2778 2778 2425 2425
0.39 0.39 0.36 0.40
Source:Authors’ survey.
Robuststandard errors inbrackets, clustered atthe classlevel.
Each column reports the results of one regression of the dependent variable (the standardized post-CAL test score on the respective subject) on the
correspondingvariablesinrows(1)–(11).
a The baselinemath/Chinese score isthe score onthe standardizedmath/Chinese testthat wasgiventoall studentsinthe samplebeforethe CAL
program.
b Access to other modern technologies is the mean value of a set of 0/1 dummy variables including whether the student has used cell phone,
Internet, game console,CAL software,and videosforlearningassistance.
∗∗ Significantat 5%.
∗∗∗ Significantat1%.
intervention, we included the 19 additional control schools
in our sample and conducted two steps of analyses. We first
examined whether there was any significant difference in
change in test scores between the control group (30 con-
trol classes in the 24 program schools) and the 19 additional
control schools over the program period using Eq. (1), ex-
cluding the school fixed effects and replacing the treatment
dummywithanindicatorofwhetherthestudentbelongedto
thecontrolgrouporadditionalcontrolgroup.Inprinciple,the
change in test scores over the program period should be the
sameforthecontrolandadditionalcontrolgroups,asneither
of these two groups received the CAL intervention. A signifi-
cantdifferenceinthechangeintestscoresbetweenthesetwo
groups would imply a significant spillover of the CAL inter-
vention. We then estimated the treatment effects using the
19 additional control schools instead of the original control
group.Iftherewasnosignificantprogramspillover,theesti-
matedprogrameffectswouldbeconsistentwiththoseusing
the originalcontrolgroup.
The results show that the program spilloversare unlikely
to have confounded the estimates of the program effects.
Over the program period the difference in change in test
scores between the additional control group and the control
groupinourcoresamplewasnotsignificantlydifferentfrom
zero (Table 5, row 1, columns 1 and 2). The estimated CAL
intervention effects on student math performance also did
notsignificantlydifferwhetherweusedthecontrolgroupin
ourcoresampleortheadditionalcontrolgroup,implyingno
significant confounding influences from either the program
spilloversoftheCALintervention(row1,columns3and4).14
5. Conclusion
In this paper we present the results from a randomized
fieldexperimentofaCALprograminvolvingover4000third-
gradestudents.ThemaininterventionwasamathCALreme-
dialtutoringprogramthatwasheldoutsideofregularschool
hours. Our results indicate that CAL has significant benefi-
14 The point estimates of the CAL program effects are larger than those
usingthecontrolgroupinthecoresample,yetthestandarderrorswerealso
larger.
46 F.Laiet al./Economicsof EducationReview47(2015)34–48
cialeffectsonbothstudentacademicandnon-academicout-
comes. Two 40-min CAL math sessions per week increased
thestudentstandardizedmathscoresby0.15standarddevi-
ations. Students with less-educated parents benefited more
from the program. CAL also significantly increased the inter-
est inlearningofthe students.
This paper contributes to the understanding of the effect
of CAL on learning outcomes for underserved populations in
developing countries in several respects. First, we took care
inpreparingsoftwareandhardwarefortheprogramandde-
signingourCALprogramimplementationandevaluationpro-
tocol in order to prevent potentially confounding influences
fromaffectingthemeasuredimpacts.Manypreviousstudies
reported various shortcomings in program implementation
(e.g.,schoolsinthetreatmentgroupusedprogramcomputers
for other purposes, such as in the case reported in Banerjee
et al., 2007) that might potentially have biased the evalua-
tion results. Our protocol took various measures to prevent
such interferences. By implementing the CAL program as a
full supplementary program, we also eliminated any substi-
tution effects that might have diminished the program ef-
fects. Further, unlike many studies in the literature that use
only one control group, our evaluation design included an
additional control group—one that had never heard about
theprogram.Thisfurtherallowedforrigorousmeasurement
(and thus elimination) of possible program spillovers on to
the control group and disentangle such spillovers from the
genuineprogrameffects.
Thispaperalsocontributestotheunderstandingoftheef-
fects of CAL by its focus on outcomes beyond test scores. Be-
sides the impacts of CAL intervention on student test scores,
this paper also examined the impacts on non-academic out-
comes suchasself-confidenceandinterestinschooling.
Given the significant impact of CAL on student academic
and nonacademic outcomes found in this paper, educational
policy makers in China (and in other developing countries,
aswellasunderservedcommunitiesindevelopedcountries)
should consider upscaling CAL programs, especially in pub-
lic schools serving disadvantaged students (e.g., rural public
schools in China). Of course, private migrant schools in Bei-
jingmightnotberepresentativeofpublicschoolsinChinaor
in other developing countries. Nonetheless, migrant schools
in Beijing and public schools (especially public schools in
poorruralareas)thatservedisadvantagedstudentsdoshare
somecommonproblems:lowteacherquality,poorschoolre-
sources,lackofremedialtutoringandtheresultingpersistent
underperformanceof thestudents.
The importance of CAL and CAL-like programs will likely
grow as China’s government, and other governments in
developing countries, have committed to making large in-
vestments in the computing facilities in rural public schools.
However,inmanyruralschools,aftertheinvestmentincom-
putingfacilitieshasbeencompleted,thecomputerroomsare
lockedandthecomputersarefrequentlyunusedbecausethe
schools do not know how to properly use them to facilitate
student learning. This paper demonstrates that a CAL
program can be used as a complementary input to existing
computingresourcesandhasthepotentialtopromotelearn-
ingoutcomesforunderservedstudentsbyproductivelyusing
these computer technologies. Therefore, we believe that
the government—in China and elsewhere—might consider
extending CAL programs on a larger scale in China and then
rigorously evaluate these new initiatives to inform policies
thatintendtoprovidebettereducationalservicetothepoor.
Acknowledgements
TheauthorswouldliketothankQuantaComputerfortheir
support for the project. They not only generously provided
the computers and other hardware, they also provided sug-
gestions and took an interest in the project from start to fin-
ish. Additional acknowledgement goes to Tianhua Shidai for
supplyingpartofthesoftware.TheREAPsoftwareteam,espe-
cially Nicholas Cheng, deserves much credit. We also would
liketothanktheChinaChildrenandTeenagers’Fundfortheir
gracious collaboration. Target Foundation, TAG Foundation,
Adobe and two anonymous private donors provided fund-
ing for the evaluation and implementation. We thank all of
the REAP students, interns and volunteers for their tireless
efforts.
F. Laiet al./EconomicsofEducationReview47 (2015)34–48 47
Appendix A. Ordinary Least Squares analysis of the main and heterogeneous impact of CAL program on student academic
outcomes before the midterm for the students in the 24 program schools.
Dependent variable:standardized midterm math score (1) (2) (3) (4)
(1)Treatment (1= thetreatment group;0= thecontrol group) 0.14∗∗∗ 0.15∗∗∗ 0.16∗∗∗ 0.15∗∗∗
(0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
(2)Treatment∗fatherhas atleastahighschool degree−0.05
(0.12)
(3)Treatment∗fatherhas acollegedegree 0.24
(0.20)
Control variables
(4)Baselinemath score(units ofstandard deviation)a 0.54∗∗∗ 0.41∗∗∗ 0.41∗∗∗ 0.41∗∗∗
(0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03)
(5)BaselineChinesescore(unitsof standard deviation)a 0.22∗∗∗ 0.22∗∗∗ 0.22∗∗∗
(0.03) (0.03) (0.03)
(6)Age(numberofyears)−0.03−0.03−0.03
(0.03) (0.03) (0.03)
(7)Female(1= yes; 0= no)−0.00−0.00−0.00
(0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
(8)Everused acomputer(1= yes; 0= no) 0.12∗∗∗ 0.12∗∗∗ 0.12∗∗∗
(0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
(9)Accessto other moderntechnologiesb
−0.07−0.07−0.07
(0.07) (0.07) (0.07)
(10)Livingwith father(1= yes;0= no)−0.03−0.03−0.03
(0.06) (0.06) (0.06)
(11)Living withmother (1= yes; 0= no) 0.06 0.06 0.06
(0.07) (0.07) (0.07)
(12)# ofsiblings−0.02∗∗∗
−0.02∗∗∗
−0.02∗∗∗
(0.01) (0.01) (0.01)
(13)Father hasacollegedegree(1= yes;0= no)−0.02−0.12
(0.13) (0.16)
(14)Father hasat least ahighschooldegree(1= yes; 0= no)−0.03−0.00−0.03
(0.06) (0.12) (0.06)
(15)Mother has acollegedegree(1= yes; 0= no) 0.07 0.07 0.05
(0.14) (0.14) (0.14)
(16)Mother has ahighschool degree(1= yes; 0= no)−0.00−0.00−0.00
(0.07) (0.07) (0.07)
(17)Schooldummy variables Y Y Y Y
(18)Observations 2369 2369 2369 2369
(19)R-squared 0.34 0.38 0.38 0.38
Source:Authors’ survey.
Robuststandard errors inbrackets, clusteredat the classlevel.
Eachcolumnreportstheresultsofoneregressionofthedependentvariableonthecorrespondingvariablesinrows(1)–(17),controllingforthe
school dummyvariables.
a The baselinemath/Chinese score isthe score onthe standardizedmath/Chinese testthat wasgiventoall studentsinthe samplebeforethe CAL
program.
b Access to other modern technologies is the mean value of a set of 0/1 dummy variables including whether the student has used cell phone,
Internet, game console,CAL software,and videosforlearningassistance.
∗∗ Significantat 5%.
∗∗∗ Significantat1%.
Appendix B. The impact of the CAL program on non-cognitive outcome at midterm and endline periods
Likeschool Likeschool Self-eﬃcacy Self-eﬃcacy Self-confidence Self-confidence
midterm endline midterm endline midterm endline
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
(1) Treatment (1= the treatmentgroup; 0= the control
0.01 0.31∗∗ 0.04−0.00 0.06 0.07
group)
(0.11) (0.15) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03) (0.04)
(2) Baselinevalueofthe outcomevariable Y Y Y Y Y Y
(3) Schooldummyvariablesandother control variables Y Y Y Y Y Y
(4) Observations 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369 2369
Source:Authors’ survey.
Robuststandard errors inbrackets, clusteredat the classlevel.
Eachcolumnreportstheresultsofoneregressionofthestudentoutcomevariable(correspondingtothecolumntitle)onthetreatmentdummy
variable,controlling forthe baseline valueofthe outcomevariable, the school dummyvariablesand othercontrol variables.
Other control variables include the student age, female (1= yes; 0= no), baseline math/Chinese score, ever used a computer (1= yes; 0= no),
accesstoothermoderntechnologies,livingwithfather(1= yes;0= no),livingwithmother(1= yes;0= no),#ofsiblings,fatherhascollegedegree
(1= yes; 0= no), father has high school degree (1= yes; 0= no), mother has college degree (1= yes; 0= no), mother has high school degree
(1= yes;0= no).
∗∗ Significant at5%.∗∗∗ Significantat1%.
48 F.Laiet al./Economicsof EducationReview47(2015)34–48
References
All-ChinaWomen’sFederation.(2008).QuanGuoNongCunLiuShouErTong
Zhuang Kuang Yan Jiu Bao Gao (Report of the status of rural left-behind
children inChina).
Angrist, J., & Lavy, V. (2002). New evidence on classroom computers and
pupillearning. TheEconomicJournal, 112(October), 735–765.
Banerjee, A., Cole, S., Duflo, E., & Linden, L. (2007). Remedying education:
Evidence from two randomized experiments in India. Quarterly Journal
of Economics,122(3), 1235–1264.
Barrow, L., Markman, L., & Rouse, C. (2008). Technology’s edge: The edu-
cational benefits of computer-aided instruction. National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research WorkingPaperNo.14240.
CCAP (Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy Chinese Academy of Sciences)
(2009). PolicyBrief, 9.Beijing,China.
Das, Jishnu, Dercon, S., Habyarimana, J., Krishnan, P., Muralidharan, K., &
Sundararaman, V. (2011). School inputs, household substitution, and
test scores.NBER Working PaperNo.16830.
Ding, J. (2004). Overhauling and regulating schools set up by migrants. Chi-
nese Educationand Society,37(5), 10–28.
Dynarski, M. (2007). Effectiveness of reading and mathematics soft-
ware products: Findings from the 1st student cohort. Mathematica
Report.
Fuchs,T.,&Woosmann,L.(2004).Computersandstudentlearning:Bivariate
and multivariate evidence on the availability and use of computers at
home and atschools. Brussels EconomicReview, 47,359–585.
Glewwe,P.,&Kremer,M.(2006).Schools,teachers,andeducationoutcomes
in developing countries, Handbook on the Economics of Education: vol. 2
(pp.945–1017). NewYork, NY:Elsevier.
Glewwe, P. & Moulin, S. (2002). Textbooks and test scores: Evidence from
a prospective evaluation in Kenya. BREAD Working Paper, Cambridge,
MA.
Glewwe, P., & Zitzewitz, E. (2004). Retrospective vs. prospective analyses of
school inputs: The case of flip charts in Kenya. Journal of Development
Economics,74, 251–268.
Goolsbee, A., & Guryan, J. (2006). The impact of Internet subsidies in pub-
lic schools. The review of economics and statistics, MIT Press, 88(2),
336–347.
Han, J. (2004). Survey report on the state of compulsory education among
migrant children in Beijing. Chinese Education and Society, 37(5),
29–55.
Hanushek, E. (1986). The economics of schooling: Production and ef-
ficiency in public schools. Journal of Economic Literature, 24, 1141–
1177.
Hanushek,E.(1995).Interpretingrecentresearchonschoolingindeveloping
countries. World Bank ResearchObserver, 10, 227–246.
He,F.,Linden,L.,&MacLeod,M.(2008).HowtoteachEnglishinIndia:Testing
therelativeproductivityofinstructionmethodswithinthePrathamEn-
glish language education program. Working Paper. Columbia University
DepartmentofEconomics.
HumanRightsWatch.(2006).China:Beijingclosesschoolsformigrantchil-
dreninpre-Olympicclean-up.September26.AccessedonlineMarch17,
2011: http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2006/09/25/china-beijing-closes-
schools-migrant-children-pre-olympic-clean.
Kirkpatrick, H., & Cuban, L. (1998). Computers make kids smarter – Right?
TechnosQuarterly forEducationandTechnology, 7(2), 26–31.
Kwong,J.(2004).Educatingmigrantchildren:Negotiationsbetweenthestate
and civilsociety.Research Report. TheChina Quarterly, 180, 1073–1088.
Lai, F., Liu, C., Luo, R., Zhang, L., Ma, X., Bai, Y., et al. (2011). Private migrant
schools or rural/urban public schools: Where should China educate its
migrantchildren? REAPWorking Paper.
Lai,F.,Liu,C.,Luo,R.,Zhang,L.,Ma,X.,Bai,Y.,Sharbono,B.,&Rozelle,S.(2014).
The Education of China’s Migrant Children: The Missing Link in China’s
Education System? International Journal of Educational Development, 37,
68–77.
Linden, L. (2008). Complement or substitute? The effect of technology on
student achievement in India. Working Paper. Columbia University De-
partmentofEconomics.
Liu, X. (2002). Overview of educational needs & philanthropic opportunities in
China.SanDiego,CA: International CommunityFoundation.
Ma,X.,Bai,Y.,Liu,C.,Pang,X.,&Rozelle,S.(2008).MigrantschoolsinChina’s
capital city: A descriptive review of a representative migrant survey.
Working Paper. Center for Chinese Agricultural Policy, Institute of Geo-
graphicalSciencesandNaturalResourcesResearch,ChineseAcademyof
Sciences,Beijing,China.
Muralidharan, K., & Kremer, M. (2006). Public and private schools in rural
India.Workingpaper.HarvardUniversity,GraduateSchoolofEducation.
Muralidharan,K.,&Sundararaman,V.(2011).Teacherperformancepay:Ex-
perimentalevidencefromIndia.JournalofPoliticalEconomy,119,39–77.
Newhouse, D., & Beegle, K. (2006). The effect of school type on academic
achievement: Evidence from Indonesia. Journal of Human Resources,
41(3), 529–557.
Planty, M., Hussar, W., Snyder, T., Provasnik, S., Kena, G., Dinkes, R., et al.
(2008). The condition of education 2008 (NCES 2008-031). Washington,
DC: National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sci-
ences, U.S.Department ofEducation.
Present’sCommitteeofAdvisorsonScienceandTechnology.(1997).Panelon
educationaltechnology.InReporttothePresidentontheuseoftechnology
to strengthen K-12 education in the United States. Washington DC: Oﬃce
ofthe President.
Rouse, C., & Krueger, A. (2004). Putting Computerized instruction to the
test:Arandomizedevaluationofa’scientifically-based’readingprogram.
EconomicsofEducationReview, 23,323–338.
Sa, Z. (2004). A case study of rural-urban migrant children’s education bar-
riers in China. In American Sociological Association Annual Meeting. San
Francisco, CA.
Schwarzer, R. (Ed.). (1992). Self-eﬃcacy: Thought control of action. Washing-
ton, DC: Hemisphere.
Song, Y., Loyalak, P., & Wei, J. (2010). Does going to public schools matter
for migrant children’s academic achievement in China. China Institute for
EducationalFinanceResearch, PekingUniversity.
Tao, H., & Yang, D. (2007). Problems of "moving children" of Beijing city
in education and its countermeasures. Jiangxi Educational Research, 1,
61–63.
WorldBank.(2004).Worlddevelopmentreport2004:Makingservicesworkfor
thepoor.New York,NY: Oxford UniversityPress.
Zhang, J. X., & Schwarzer, R. (1995). Measuring optimistic self-beliefs: A
Chinese adaptation of the general self-eﬃcacy scale. Psychologia: An In-
ternationalJournal of PsychologyintheOrient, 38(3), 174–181.