Dissecting the Flipped Classroom: Using a Randomized Controlled
Trial Experiment to Determine When Student Learning Occurs
Matthew D. Casselman,*,†,§ Kinnari Atit,‡,§ Grace Henbest,† Cybill Guregyan,† Kiana Mortezaei,†
and Jack F. Eichler*,†,§
†
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Riverside, 501 Big Springs Road, Riverside, California 92521, United States
‡
Graduate School of Education, University of California, Riverside, 1207 Sproul Hall, Riverside, California 92521, United States
*S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: The use of the flipped classroom approach in higher education STEM courses has rapidly increased over the past
decade, and it appears this type of learning environment will play an important role in improving student success and retention
in undergraduate chemistry “gatekeeper” courses. Many adopters of the flipped classroom structure see the greatest benefit
originating from the additional time this format provides for the implementation of student-centered learning activities during
the classroom period. However, results from recent quasi-experiments suggest that improved course performance for students in
flipped classroom environments has a significant contribution from the online preclass activities. In order to compare the impact
of the preclass online learning environment to the in-class collaborative activities typically done in a flipped classroom, a
randomized controlled trial (RCT) was conducted with student volunteers. A two-day organic chemistry stereochemistry unit
was delivered to students who were randomly assigned to “flipped classroom” and “traditional lecture” treatment groups.
Performance gains were measured after each phase of the instructional intervention for both treatment groups, and these gains
were compared to students from a randomly assigned negative control group. A mixed-methods ANOVA indicates that under
these experimental conditions the online learning component appears to account for most of the improvement in posttest scores
observed in the flipped classroom treatment. These results suggest optimizing the design of the asynchronous online learning
environment will positively impact student performance outcomes. Therefore, this component of the flipped classroom deserves
more attention from instructional designers and classroom practitioners.
KEYWORDS: Chemical Education Research, First-Year Undergraduate/General, Multimedia-Based Learning,
Collaborative/Cooperative Learning, Stereochemistry
FEATURE: Chemical Education Research
■ INTRODUCTION
Flipped classrooms and blended learning environments have
been rapidly growing in popularity in the past 10 years,
particularly in higher education STEM courses. This is
reflected in the educational research literature, where the
number of publications dedicated to flipped classrooms has
grown significantly as online learning has become increasingly
normalized in both secondary schools and in higher education
(see Figure 1). Though this approach to teaching has been
gaining momentum, there are still very few research
publications dedicated to determining which aspect of the
flipped classroom has the most significant impact on student
classroom performance. In particular, it would be of interest to
determine how much improvement on in-class assessments can
be attributed to the online learning environment versus the inclass activities, and not just the overall flipped classroom
treatment.
The exact definition of the flipped classroom can vary
depending on the audience or discipline in which it is being
discussed. Therefore, for the purposes of this study, flipped
classrooms will be defined as a blended learning scaffold in
which some portion of the traditional in-class lecture is
completed by students as preclass work in an online,
asynchronous format, and some portion of the traditional
individual homework is done via collaborative group work that
is completed in the live classroom. A more detailed discussion
of the typical definition of the flipped classroom and what
elements comprise this type of classroom structure has been
previously reported by Seery.1 We note here that a “flipped
class” specifically refers to inverting the location and support
structure of the lecture and homework components, with the
lecture component taking place online and being completed
individually, and the homework being done collaboratively in
groups during the in-person classroom meeting. Some of the
seminal work on flipped classrooms in the physics community
associated the primary benefit of the intervention with the
increased use of active learning techniques during class,2,3 and
a more recent review of flipped classroom implementations in
undergraduate chemistry also finds that many educators view
this classroom structure as a means to develop a more active
learning environment and increase student engagement.1
Recognition of this benefit is not surprising, given the fact
the education research literature clearly indicates active
learning pedagogies lead to greater learning gains than
Received: August 17, 2019
Revised: October 21, 2019
Article
Cite This: J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX pubs.acs.org/jchemeduc
© XXXX American Chemical Society and
Division of Chemical Education, Inc. A DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767
J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
Downloaded via WESTERN UNIV on November 18, 2019 at 03:43:53 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.
traditional passive lectures.4 However, a closer examination of
the learning theory suggests the online asynchronous activities
should also have a significant impact on students’ learning
outcomes.
Though an overview describing how cognitive load theory
can act as the theoretical framework for the flipped classroom
has been previously laid out by Seery,1 additional context
about the theory underpinning this type of learning environment is provided here. To explain the potential benefits and
practicalities of implementing a flipped classroom pedagogical
approach, we feel it is prudent to consult John Sweller’s
cognitive load theory5 and the theory of knowledge
coconstruction presented by Hogan.6 Cognitive load theory
asserts that because one’s working memory capacity and shortterm memory are limited, learning experiences ought to be
designed in a way that allows students to more effectively learn
new information and integrate it into their existing knowledge
state. The flipped classroom approach recognizes this by
replacing the rigidly structured traditional classroom environment with flexible preclass work that provides novice learners
the necessary time to process and understand the information
at their own pace. Indeed, on the basis of Seery’s survey of
flipped classrooms in higher education chemistry courses, a
general theme emerged in which students reported liking this
classroom structure because they can access and engage with
the material on their own time.1 Hogan would posit that
students are then able to engage actively in collaborative work
during class instructional time with problems that would
otherwise be done as individual out-of-class homework. By
moving the traditional individual homework to this collaborative setting, students acquire intellectual skills such as
coconstructing and enriching knowledge, coupled with the
ability to reason critically, that are fundamental in science
learning and education. It seems evident that by adopting a
flipped classroom model, STEM educators can use individually
navigated online learning experiences to overcome the working
memory and cognitive load limitations inherent in traditional
lectures, and use the in-class synchronous learning to create a
collaborative learning environment that will more effectively
integrate this new knowledge into the students’ long-term
memory and existing mental models.
The concepts highlighted here regarding Sweller’s cognitive
load theory also constitute the foundational underpinnings of
Richard Mayer’s cognitive theory of multimedia learning.7 The
cognitive theory of multimedia learning purports that gaining
new knowledge through online instruction can effectively take
place if one receives information from two sensory platforms:
auditory and visual. This information is then organized and
works in conjunction with prior knowledge that is retrieved
from one’s long-term memory to foster meaningful learning as
opposed to rote learning and helps overcome the limitations of
one’s working memory capacity.8 The online preclass assignments used in this study were informed by the cognitive theory
of multimedia learning, as they were structured in a way that
integrated the auditory and visual components necessary for
learning novel skills and new concepts.
The number of studies aiming to measure the efficacy of the
flipped classroom in undergraduate education courses has
increased rapidly over recent years. Seery’s review of the
flipped classroom summarizes the general trends about how
instructors have designed flipped classrooms in chemistry and
the efficacy of this classroom structure on student learning
outcomes.1 This analysis reveals that flipped classrooms
generally lead to improved student outcomes, either in regard
to improved exam scores, improved course grades, and/or
reduced failure rates. We also highlight here two more recent
quasi-experimental studies in which flipped classroom
interventions were compared to “teaching as usual” controls
and analyses probing the impact on less-prepared students
were conducted. Ryan and Reid ran a parallel controlled study
in general chemistry and found exam performance improved in
the flipped treatment condition relative to a traditional lecture
condition, but only for the bottom one-third of students based
on academic preparation. The flipped treatment also lowered
the DFW (D’s, F’s, and withdrawals) rate by 56%.9 Crimmins
and Midkiff compared student learning in a flipped classroom
in organic chemistry to historical data from traditional lectures
and found that all students in the flipped classroom scored
higher on the exams and had higher probabilities of increased
course grades relative to students from previous traditional
lecture courses.10 Notably, it was also found that students from
the lowest academic achievement levels made the most gains.
These findings not only corroborate the previous consensus
that flipped classroom structures generally improve student
performance in both general and organic chemistry, but they
have also begun to provide more insight about which types of
students might benefit most from this learning environment.
As mentioned above, many practitioners and researchers
regard the in-class active learning as the most important aspect
of the flipped classroom when it comes to improving student
performance outcomes. However, recent quasi-experimental
studies suggest the online learning component of the flipped
classroom model may indeed account for a significant portion
of the improved scores on in-class assessments and/or course
grades. A previous report from our group revealed that student
grades in a flipped classroom were significantly higher
compared to a control section in which a more traditional
lecture was administered.11 Our initial motivation for
investigating the efficacy of the flipped classroom also
originated from the perceived benefits of incorporating more
active learning in class. Further analysis of student performance
on exams and in-class clicker questions indicated that, even
though the flipped classroom and traditional lecture cohorts
had equivalent exam scores, the students in the flipped
classroom treatment scored significantly higher on the in-class
clicker questions. These results suggested students in the
Figure 1. Total number of citations for educational research articles
related to flipped classrooms plotted versus year (2000−2018). The
total number of citations/year includes only research articles
identified by the Web of Science database associated with the search
terms “flipped classroom” and/or “hybrid learning”.
Journal of Chemical Education Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767
J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
B
flipped classroom treatment initially performed better in class,
presumably due to the preclass online learning activities, yet
the in-class activities and homework completed in the
traditional lecture control allowed these students to make
equivalent learning gains on the summative assessments. A
more recent quasi-experimental study compared a course
taught using a flipped format to both a traditional lecture and a
course that integrated collaborative active learning without any
preclass learning.12 This study found the flipped classroom that
included both online learning and in-person collaborative
active learning led to higher exam scores relative to the
traditional lecture course and the course that included only a
collaborative active learning intervention. These results further
corroborate that online learning may be a more critical
component of the flipped classroom than generally recognized.
Due to the restraints inherent in carrying out quasiexperimental studies within the confines of live classrooms, a
randomized controlled trial (RCT) was employed outside of
an actual classroom setting in the present study. In particular,
this provided an opportunity to measure the impact of the
different components of the flipped classroom on student
performance without raising ethical questions regarding
delivering equally effective instruction to all study participants
and helped eliminate potential compensatory rivalry validity
threats (i.e., when a study group not receiving a treatment feels
disadvantaged). A mixed-effects research study design was used
in which two alternative treatments, a flipped classroom and
traditional lecture, were monitored for performance gains over
time and compared to a negative control group in which no
treatment was delivered. The RCT experiment provided an
opportunity to test the specific research hypothesis stating,
“The pre-class online learning component of a flipped
classroom contributes as much, or more than the in-person
collaborative group learning to the overall performance gains in
a model flipped classroom intervention.” The quantitative
study was supplemented with follow-up interviews conducted
with a subpopulation of participants from each treatment
group, which provided additional insight about which aspects
of the flipped classroom were most positively viewed by
students and why they were motivated to participate. Hence,
the results of this novel RCT experiment and qualitative
analysis of the student experience in a flipped classroom
environment will be described herein.
■ RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND METHODS
Research Study Design
This study was intended to test the following research
questions: (1) How much of the student performance gains
in a model flipped classroom intervention can be attributed to
the preclass online learning? (2) How would the sequence of
preclass online learning and in-person collaborative group
problem solving impact student performance relative to the
sequence of in-person passive lecture and individual homework
problem solving? It is noted the primary motivation for
including a traditional lecture treatment group was not to
compare the pre/posttest performance gains between the
flipped and traditional lecture group, but rather to provide a
point of comparison regarding when student scores on the
posttest assessments improved over the course of the study.
An RCT was conducted with student volunteers (n = 49)
recruited from a first-quarter organic chemistry course taught
in the fall of 2018. This course routinely incorporates
collaborative group learning in class; therefore, all study
participants had engaged in such activities prior to the RCT
experiment. The sample size required for an analysis of
variance (ANOVA) to achieve a power of 0.80 with an effect
size of 0.50 was estimated as described by Cohen (three study
groups with an α = 0.05; minimum number of participants per
group = 14).13 Student volunteers were recruited by the
instructor via email, under the University of CaliforniaRiverside Institutional Research Board (IRB) human subjects
protocol HS-16-212, and the recruitment clearly stated the
study was not part of the official course. Students were asked to
provide their availability in the recruitment email, and the final
list of study participants was chosen on the basis of who was
able to attend the scheduled study sessions.
The available participants were then randomly assigned to
one of the three study groups prior to commencing the study
(see Table 1), and were subsequently informed that their level
of participation would have no bearing on their class grade and
that they would be receiving a $25 gift card at the conclusion
of the study. Students randomly assigned to the negative
control group only completed the day 0 and day 7 pre- and
posttests and did not receive any learning interventions. These
students provided a baseline comparison for the performance
gains measured in the two treatment groups. The flipped
classroom and traditional lecture treatment groups attended
two learning intervention sessions during the seven-day study
period during the first and second weeks of the term where
they learned topics relating to stereochemistry, and the
sessions were held in the evenings outside of the time frame
in which most classes on campus are scheduled. The study was
carefully timed within the academic term such that students
would have had an introduction to organic chemistry,
specifically line-bond notation, but had not yet been
introduced to stereochemistry as a concept. In the first session
(day 0), all participants completed the pretest assessment and
a measure of spatial reasoning (the Mental Rotations Test;
MRT).14 As stereochemistry is a spatially demanding topic in
chemistry,15 we measured students’ spatial reasoning to ensure
that differences in performance gains are not driven solely by
differences in students’ spatial skills. The pre- and posttest
assessments are 22-item free response measures that probe
Table 1. Research Study Design with Treatment Group and Control Group Activities over the Seven Day Study
Day Full Flip Treatment (n = 15) Traditional Lecture Treatment (n = 18) Negative Control (n = 16)
Day 0 Pretest; spatial reasoning test Pretest; spatial reasoning test Pretest; spatial reasoning test
Day 4 Video lecture with Playposita
questions and online quiz (1.5 h)
In-person traditional lecture (1.5 h) No lesson
Day 5 Posttest 1; Collaborative group
learning/practice problems (1.5 h)
Posttest 1; Individual homework
problems (1.5 h)
No lesson
Day 7 Posttest 2 Posttest 2 Posttest 2
Two weeks subsequent to study Follow-up interviews with select participants Follow-up interviews with select participants n/a
a
Playposit questions are questions embedded within the video lecture; see ref 17.
Journal of Chemical Education Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767
J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
C
student understanding of stereochemical properties of organic
molecules (see Supporting Information for the pre- and
posttest instruments) and ask students to answer questions
relating to these learning outcomes:
(1) identify the relationship between a pair of molecules
(identical molecules, constitutional isomers, or stereoisomers);
(2) quantify the number of chirality centers in a given
molecule;
(3) rank substituents as if they were attached to a chirality
center;
(4) assign R/S configuration to a chirality center depicted
with well-defined stereochemistry;
(5) draw a molecule in R/S configuration when stereochemistry was not defined;
(6) identify the relationship between a pair of molecules
(enantiomers, diastereomers, or meso compounds); and
(7) draw an enantiomer or diastereomer of a molecule
depicted with well-defined stereochemistry.
It is noted that the pre- and posttest instruments focus on
skills that are zero- or one-dimensional, as defined by the threedimensional learning assessment protocol.16 These levels of
questions were chosen because the limited time frame of the
interventions might have led to more limited improvement in
higher-dimension scientific and engineering practices and were
chosen to reduce the subjectivity of evaluating the student
performance on the pre- and posttests.
The flipped treatment and traditional lecture treatment
groups completed the first learning interventions (day 4). For
the flipped treatment group, students were given 90 min to
individually watch a playlist of five videos (total video time: 23
min, 6 s) which were integrated with quiz content using the
Playposit platform.17 The Playposit questions were embedded
within the video with the intent of keeping students engaged
while content was presented. The videos were produced in a
screen-capture system with instructor voiceover, featuring the
same instructor as the traditional lecture treatment. These
questions were presented in multiple-choice format, and
students received feedback on incorrect answers. Students
had control over playback (i.e., pause and review segments)
and could watch the videos multiple times. Students were not
able to ask clarifying questions to instructors nor to have
discussion with each other. For the traditional lecture
treatment group, students attended a 90 min in-class lecture
given by the instructor. As the lecture was given by the same
instructor that made the videos, the material featured was at
the same level in each setting. Example problems were carried
out by the instructor in the lecture treatment group, and these
corresponded to the questions asked in the Playposit system.
The flipped and traditional lecture treatment groups then
completed posttest 1 prior to the second learning intervention
(day 5). During this 90 min period, students were given 20
min to complete the same pretest (posttest 1) they had taken
on day 0. Subsequently, students in the flipped treatment were
instructed to form small groups (2−4 students) and work
collaboratively on a problem set. This problem set featured free
response questions that addressed the same types of questions
asked on the pretest/posttest assessments. During this time
students could discuss problems among themselves and ask
clarifying questions from the instructor who circulated around
the classroom. Students in the traditional lecture treatment
were instructed to work on the same problem set individually.
To emulate traditional homework, students were not allowed
to discuss problems with each other or the instructor but could
check their work using a key that was provided. Finally, all
study participants completed the final posttest (posttest 2)
(day 7). Study participants did not have access to the pretest
assessment given at the beginning of the study; thus, the
pretest was administered again on the fifth day of the study to
measure performance gains after the first day of treatment.
This is denoted as “posttest 1”. The final posttest contained
different items than the pretest, but each item was analogous to
the items on the pretest. Tests were scored by author M.D.C.
using an objective answer key (see pre- and posttests in
Supporting Information).
Statistical Analyses
In order to test the experimental hypothesis, student
performances on the pre- and posttest assessments and spatial
reasoning test were compared both within and between each
study group over the three testing points. The SPSS (Statistics
Package for the Social Sciences) Statistics 24 software package
was used to carry out the one-way ANOVA and test validity
statistics.18 The lmerTest and emmeans packages in R version
3.5.3 were used to run a mixed-effects ANOVA model, which
included the treatment groups as between-subjects factors and
time as the within-subjects factor. The equation used for the
mixed-effects model is as follows:
Y =Β + + + + BX B X B XX ε 0 11 2 2 31 2
where Y represents test score, X1 represents condition, X2
represents time (i.e., the three testing sessions), and ε
represents the error. Tukey honestly significant difference
(HSD) posthoc pairwise comparisons were also calculated in R
to compare the performance within and between the study
groups. Hedges’s g effect sizes were calculated using group
means and standard deviations on each pre- and postassessment for the within-group pairwise comparisons, and the
between-groups effect sizes (dppc2) were calculated as described
by Morris.19 Hedge’s g and dppc2 effect sizes were interpreted as
described by Cohen (effect sizes greater than 0.20 = small
effect, greater than 0.50 = medium effect, and greater than 0.80
= large effect).13
Interview Methodology and Analyses
Two weeks following the study, five participants from each
treatment group were randomly selected to participate in a
follow-up interview. These interviews were conducted to
obtain qualitative data that could be used to complement the
quantitative data described above, and more specifically to gain
further insight about which aspects of the treatment
interventions students appeared to value most and learn how
the treatments carried out in the study compared to a realworld classroom implementation. Interviews were audio
recorded and then transcribed prior to analysis. Interview
questions for the students in the flipped treatment condition
and traditional lecture condition have been included in the
Supporting Information (Supplemental Tables 7 and 8),
respectively.
■ RESULTS
The pre- and posttests were administered to the study groups
as described above, and the mean scores at each testing point
are summarized along with the descriptive statistics of the
study populations in Table 2. To reduce the possibility
students might experience improved performance due to
Journal of Chemical Education Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767
J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
D
familiarity with the test instrument, the specific chemical
structures used in the posttest 1 question items were changed
to create an analogous assessment that was then used as
posttest 2. Because customized assessments had to be created
to test the distinct set of learning objectives covered in the
treatment group interventions, item-analyses were carried out
and the internal assessment reliability was determined for both
assessments by measuring coefficient α (see SI, Supplemental
Tables 1−3). The items in both posttests were deemed to be
within an acceptable range of difficulty (all but one of the item
means ranged from 0.20 to 0.80 for both posttests; see SI,
Supplemental Table 3), and all but one of the questions had
positive item-total correlations above 0.20 for both posttests
(see SI, Supplemental Table 2). Item 14 was found to have a
negative item-total correlation in both tests; therefore, this
question was removed prior to all analyses in which the preand posttest scores were compared within or between study
groups. Because there were multiple content items included in
the posttest instrument, the overall internal reliability of the
posttest was assessed using the stratified α reliability coefficient
(αs) as described by Widhiarso and Ravand.20 The internal
reliability was found to be in the acceptable range for both
posttests (αs = 0.803 and 0.832 for posttest 1 and posttest 2,
respectively; see SI, Supplemental Table 1). Though posttest 2
was not identical to posttest 1, the similarity in internal
validities and the plots of item discrimination versus item
difficulty (see SI, Supplemental Figure 1) provide evidence the
two posttests were adequately aligned and similarly measured
the student learning objectives covered in the study treatments.
Even though the random assignment of study participants
should have minimized selection validity threats, a one-way
ANOVA was carried out to determine if the two treatment
populations had significant differences in incoming spatial
reasoning skills. This analysis appears to suggest the null
hypothesis stating the two populations had equivalent
incoming spatial reasoning skills cannot be rejected (see SI,
Supplemental Table 4); therefore, this independent variable
was not controlled in the subsequent analyses.
Though the descriptive statistics suggest both treatment
groups appeared to make most of their overall performance
gains after the first day of the intervention (see Table 2), it was
desired to determine the significance of the difference in mean
test scores between each treatment group, and within each
treatment group at the different time points. To compare the
performance gains between all three conditions over the course
of the intervention, a mixed-effects ANOVA model was run as
described above. These results indicate a significant effect of
condition, a significant effect of time, and a significant
condition by time interaction (see SI, Supplemental Table
5.) Tukey HSD adjusted posthoc pairwise comparisons reveal
that both the flipped treatment and the lecture conditions
showed greater improvement in the assessment scores than the
negative control group, but there was no statistically significant
difference between the flipped treatment group and the lecture
group in overall improvement (see Table 3). Furthermore,
both the flipped treatment group and the lecture group
significantly improved from pretest to posttest 1 (see Table 4)
but did not show statistically significant improvement from
posttest 1 to posttest 2 (see Table 4). As expected, the negative
control group showed no change in performance over the
course of the study. Finally, there were significant performance
gains for the flipped treatment condition and lecture condition
from pretest to posttest 2 (see Table 4). A graph illustrating
student performance between the three conditions and across
the three testing time points is shown in Figure 2.
Interview transcripts were coded for the following themes:
(1) student motivation/reasoning for why they participated in
the study; (2) which learning component was perceived as
most useful (e.g., online learning, in-person practice probTable 2. Descriptive Statistics for Treatment and Negative
Control Groups
Statistic
Negative
Control
Flipped
Treatment
Traditional
Lecture Treatment
Number of
participants (n) n = 16 n = 15 n = 18
Pretest averagea 7.12 ± 2.87 6.80 ± 2.93 7.00 ± 2.68
Posttest 1
averagea n/a 13.13 ± 3.68 12.22 ± 5.31
Posttest 2
averagea 6.62 ± 2.68 13.33 ± 2.69 13.61 ± 3.35
MRT averageb 8.68 ± 2.52 7.47 ± 3.80 9.11 ± 5.82
UCR GPAc 3.178 ± 0.478 3.023 ± 0.951 3.141 ± 0.911
a
Pre- and posttest average scores are reported out of a total of 22
possible points. b
MRT average scores are reported out of a total of 24
possible points. c
Average GPA for all sophomores and juniors in the
UCR College of Natural and Agricultural Science = 2.99 ± 0.52; n =
2,575 (GPA scale reported out of a total possible of 4.0).
Table 3. Tukey Adjusted Posthoc Pairwise Contrasts
Examining Differences between Conditionsa
Pairwise
Comparison
Difference Estimate df t pdppc2b
Negative Control− Flipped −4.297 46 −4.376 <0.001 2.338
Negative Control− Lecture −4.153 46 −4.423 <0.001 2.477
Flipped−Lecture 0.144 46 0.151 >0.05 −0.029
a
df = degrees of freedom. t = test statistic. p = significance. b
Effect
sizes calculated here are dppc2 as reported by Morris for repeated
measures designs; see ref 19.
Table 4. Tukey Adjusted Posthoc Pairwise Contrasts
Examining Differences within Conditions over Timea
Pairwise Comparison
Difference Estimate df t pgb
Negative Control:
Pretest−Posttest 2
0.500 92 0.600 >0.050 0.176
Flipped Pretest− Posttest 1 −6.333 92 −7.354 <0.001 1.799
Flipped Posttest 1− Posttest 2 −0.200 92 −0.232 >0.050 0.088
Flipped Pretest−
Posttest 2
−6.533 92 −7.587 <0.001 2.195
Traditional Lecture
Pretest−Posttest 1
−5.222 92 −6.643 <0.001 1.186
Traditional Lecture
Posttest 1− Posttest 2
−1.389 92 −1.767 >0.050 0.336
Traditional Lecture
Pretest−Posttest 2 −6.611 92.0 −8.410 <0.001 2.084
a
Hedges’s g effect sizes are reported for each pairwise comparison (df
= degrees of freedom; t = test statistic; p = significance). b
Hedge’s g is
similar to Cohen’s d, except it is calculated using sample-based pooled
standard deviations rather than population-based pooled standard
decisions.
Journal of Chemical Education Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767
J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
E
lems); and (3) the challenges students faced in their assigned
learning condition. All interview data were dual coded by
author K.A. and by a research assistant. After coding the
transcripts for the themes, the coders summarized each of the
participants’ responses (provided in SI, Supplemental Tables 7
and 8). There was 90% agreement between the two coders, but
areas of disagreement in the coding were resolved through
discussion. We highlight here the following results: (1) four
out of five participants from each treatment group reported
they were motivated to participate in the study because of the
opportunity to gain extra practice in learning stereochemistry;
(2) four out of five flipped participants stated their favorite part
of the study was using the online videos; (3) three of the five
flipped participants stated they preferred the flipped classroom
format to a traditional lecture; (4) four out the five flipped
participants stated they would have liked to spend more time
watching the videos; and (5) three out of the five flipped
participants felt the collaborative group learning was
fundamental to their learning the stereochemistry concepts
(see SI, Supplemental Tables 7 and 8).
■ DISCUSSION
This study was designed to gain insight into which aspects of
the flipped classroom might have the most impact on student
performance. The topic of stereochemistry in organic
chemistry was specifically chosen because it is a concept that
students do not encounter prior to the organic chemistry
course, and all students would start with minimal pre-existing
knowledge related to these learning objectives. The general
effectiveness of the treatment groups is evident from the
descriptive statistics, which reveal notable increases in the
posttest scores relative to the pretest (see Table 2, Table 4, and
Figure 2). It is particularly noteworthy that even after a single
day of learning, significant improvement in the posttest scores
was observed in both treatment groups. This is evidenced by
the pretest to posttest 1 gains relative to the negative control.
However, the flipped classroom treatment appears to have
made no additional gains after the second day of learning,
whereas the traditional lecture appears to have made some
additional minor gains from posttest 1 to posttest 2 (see Table
2, Table 4, and Figure 2).
Experimental Hypothesis and Research Question 1: Online
Learning versus Group Learning
The statistical significance of the differences in mean test
scores between both groups, and within groups over time, are
revealed in the mixed-effects ANOVA model and posthoc tests
described above. These results clearly indicate significant
performance gains were made after the first day of learning for
both treatment groups, as the within-group pairwise comparisons indicate that posttest 1 scores were significantly higher
than the pretest scores (see Table 4 and Figure 2). Conversely,
the within-group pairwise comparisons suggest negligible
performance gains were made after the flipped treatment
collaborative group learning or traditional lecture treatment
individual homework problem solving (see Table 4 and Figure
2). Therefore, it appears that under these experimental
conditions the experimental hypothesis cannot be rejected, in
which it was stated the preclass online learning component of a
flipped classroom contributes as much, or more than, the inperson collaborative group learning to the overall performance
gains in a model flipped classroom intervention. Interestingly,
the passive lecture also appeared to account for most of the
improvement in posttest scores in the traditional lecture
treatment; however, the effect sizes suggest the online video
treatment may have led to greater performance gains relative to
the passive lecture (g = 1.799 and 1.186, respectively; see
Table 4). It is also noted that though the differences in mean
scores for posttest 1 and posttest 2 were not statistically
significant, the effect sizes suggest the individual homework
intervention may have had a greater subsequent impact on
student performance than the collaborative group learning (g =
0.336 and 0.088, respectively, see Table 4).
Classroom studies that compare flipped and traditional
approaches to teaching often compare exam scores between
groups, but to our knowledge the report from Moore and coworkers is the only study in which the impact of the different
aspects of a typical flipped classroom were measured in
parallel.12 Though this previous study found a fully flipped
classroom appeared to yield higher exam scores compared to a
nonflipped class that included collaborative group learning, the
performance gains that took place within the fully flipped
classroom were not correlated to any particular part of the
flipped classroom intervention. The structure used in the
present study focused on teaching a learning objective over an
abbreviated time period outside a for-credit classroom
environment, which provided an opportunity to assess which
aspects of the treatments resulted in the greatest improvement
in posttest scores. The results here appear to corroborate the
general findings from Moore, in which it was found the
preclass learning component of the flipped classroom
intervention is an important contributor to student performance. Sweller’s cognitive load theory and Mayer’s cognitive
load theory of multimedia learning suggest preclass multimedia
interventions should reduce cognitive load relative to a
traditional lecture. This is primarily achieved by integrating
and synchronizing auditory and visual components in the video
presentation (versus students watching an instructor from afar,
and successively receiving auditory and visual input that is then
transcribed into notes). The online learning environment used
in this study also reduced cognitive load by segmenting the
presentation of content, both by taking the 90 min lecture and
breaking it down into multiple shorter videos, but also by
segmenting the student work within each video by integrating
the Playposit questions. Cognitive load theory also suggests
Figure 2. Mean performance (maximum score: 22) on the measure of
stereochemistry understanding at all three testing time points (pretest,
posttest 1, and posttest 2) for each condition (lecture, flipped
treatment, and negative control). *Indicates posttest 1 scores for the
flipped and traditional lecture treatment groups were significantly
higher than their corresponding pretest scores. **Indicates the
posttest 2 scores for the flipped and traditional lecture treatment
groups were significantly higher than the posttest 2 score for the
negative control group.
Journal of Chemical Education Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767
J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
F
students learn to “chunk” together different elements of
information that can be processed as one entity in their
working memory, and that these chunks reside in the longterm memory or are formed using knowledge from long-term
memory.5,7 It is also thought that novices have less developed
chunks of knowledge in their long-term memory;5,7 therefore,
it is quite possible the segmented video tutorials typical in the
flipped classroom online learning environment can help
students overcome this cognitive limitation.
Though the difference in posttest 1 mean scores between the
flipped classroom and traditional lecture treatments did not
appear to be statistically significant, the flipped classroom
treatment did have a higher mean score on posttest 1 with a
higher effect size (flipped treatment, g = 1.799; traditional
lecture treatment, g = 1.186; see Table 4). This suggests the
online learning intervention may have indeed improved
student performance relative to the passive lecture, but future
research needs to focus on designing online learning
interventions that can further reduce cognitive load for
students in an effort to maximize the impact of this learning
environment. We also note that four of the five students
interviewed from the flipped treatment group indicated they
would have spent more time engaging in the online video
environment; however, this was not possible due to the
limitations of the experimental design. This implies cognitive
load could have been further reduced had the flipped
classroom intervention more closely modeled a real classroom
implementation. Finally, it is noted the students who
volunteered for this study appeared to have higher GPAs
relative to the UCR College of Natural and Agricultural
Science overall student population (see Table 2). Since flipped
classroom interventions have been found to have the most
impact on less prepared students,9,10 the fact the students in
this study appear to be higher achieving students may have also
limited the impact of the flipped classroom treatment relative
to the traditional lecture treatment.
Research Question 2: Flipped Sequence versus Traditional
Sequence
On the surface, it was somewhat surprising that the flipped
classroom treatment appeared to make no additional performance gains after the collaborative group learning intervention,
but a more careful analysis framing this experimental
implementation within Hogan’s theory of knowledge coconstruction might explain these results.6 This theoretical
framework suggests that improved performance is linked to
how students form relationships with their peers and
instructor. Because the collaborative group learning conducted
in this study was restricted to a single 1.5 h long intervention,
longer-term social relationships could not be built within
student groups or with the instructor. This might have stunted
the performance gains that would normally be expected to
arise from this type of learning environment.21,22 Another
possible explanation for the plateauing of student posttest
scores in the flipped treatment may be linked to the assessment
itself. Even though students had room to make additional
performance gains (the average score on posttest 2 was 13.33
out of 22 possible points), perhaps the remaining question
items were simply too difficult for the students to learn within
the time frame of the study. With that said, students who
completed individual homework in the traditional lecture
treatment did appear to make slightly larger performance gains
from posttest 1 to posttest 2 (see Table 2 and Table 4), and
item-analyses of posttest 1 and posttest 2 within the flipped
treatment group indicate there was some variability in the
distribution of missed test items among the study participants
(e.g., item 3C had a mean = 0.0882 in posttest 1, whereas it
had a mean = 0.206 in posttest 2; and item 6B had a mean =
0.500 in posttest 1, whereas it has a mean = 0.794 in posttest 2;
see SI, Supplemental Table 3). These data suggest the lack of
student performance gains was most likely attributed to a
limitation in the design of the intervention and not attributed
to the assessment used in measuring student understanding of
stereochemistry.
Limitations and Future Work
Future research will aim to address some of the limitations
noted for this study. In particular, longer study times will be
planned in an effort to better model how students use the
online learning space, and to increase the potential impact of
the collaborative group learning environment. Additionally,
studies will be designed to measure how online learning
environments might be optimized for different types of
learning outcomes (e.g., spatial reasoning versus algorithmic
problem solving) and how the structure of the collaborative
group learning impacts this part of the flipped classroom
intervention. These follow-up studies will explore different
implementations of online learning environments to probe
which are most effective for each type of learning outcome.
Student comments from the focus group interviews suggest the
flipped treatment participants found stereochemistry to be a
fairly easy topic, while the traditional lecture described it as
more intermediate in nature. This may point to the online
learning environment being of greater effectiveness for spatial
learning outcomes. A recent study by Stull and Hegarty
provides evidence that interventions using hand-held models
or computer-based virtual models were superior to teaching
structural representations for organic molecules relative to an
intervention in which students received verbal feedback on
paper-based drawing assignments.23 It was also found that the
handheld models and computer-based models reduced
cognitive load and helped students scaffold their knowledge,
which led to more sustained learning relative to the paperbased drawing intervention. Though the report from Stull and
Hegarty did not explore the use of molecular models in an
online environment, these results suggest online modules that
incorporate computer-based interventions can act as an
effective platform for teaching molecular structure and
submicroscopic representations.
In addition to probing how to most effectively design online
learning modules for different areas of chemistry content, it
will be prudent to carry out experiments in which higherdimensional thinking is incorporated into the online learning
interventions. It was noted earlier that the learning objectives
included in this study were determined to be zero- and onedimensional skills within the three-dimensional learning
assessment protocol (i.e., the learning objectives chosen for
the treatment groups were foundational skills needed to
perform future higher-dimensional tasks).16 To our knowledge
studies that compare the effectiveness of online learning
platforms in teaching and assessing concepts at multiple levels
of the three-dimensional learning protocol have not been
reported. Therefore, future studies will also include online
learning modules that incorporate scientific and engineering
practices, cross-cutting concepts, and/or disciplinary core
ideas. Demonstrating that flipped classrooms can help students
Journal of Chemical Education Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767
J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
G
achieve learning that goes beyond rote learning and basic skill
building will be critical in providing proof-of-concept for
chemistry practitioners interested in adopting the flipped
classroom structure.
Conclusion
In summary, the findings described herein suggest historical
implementations of the flipped classroom may have overlooked
the impact of the asynchronous online learning environment
on student performance outcomes relative to in-person
collaborative group learning. In terms of the implications for
classroom practitioners, the results presented herein provide
evidence that students can indeed make significant gains in
skill-based assessments in an asynchronous online learning
environment. Perhaps these results might alleviate fears some
classroom instructors have in releasing their students into this
more individualized and unsupervised learning space. Though
this study was not designed to compare the efficacy of a model
flipped classroom to a traditional lecture intervention, previous
quasi-experiments have demonstrated that flipped classrooms
generally lead to improved performance on summative
assessments and higher course grades, and chemistry
instructors should strongly consider adopting this classroom
structure in lieu of more passive lecture pedagogies. More
importantly, the findings presented herein suggest the
chemistry education community needs to focus its attention
on improving the design of the online learning environment
within the flipped classroom scaffold. If educational researchers
and instructional designers can focus more attention on
optimizing student learning for different types of learning
objectives within an asynchronous online space, significant
progress on improving student learning outcomes and success
in introductory undergraduate STEM courses might be
achieved. Given the rapidly expanding use of the flipped
classroom approach, making this type of targeted improvement
in student learning within the online learning space is likely to
positively impact the broader success and retention of students
in STEM gateway courses.
■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*S Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available on the ACS
Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767.
Supplemental data tables and figures (PDF, DOCX)
Pretest and posttest 1 instrument and key (PDF)
Posttest 2 instrument and key (PDF)
■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*E-mail: matthew.casselman@ucr.edu.
*E-mail: jack.eichler@ucr.edu.
ORCID
Matthew D. Casselman: 0000-0001-9040-4663
Jack F. Eichler: 0000-0003-2755-3636
Author Contributions
§
M.D.C., K.A., and J.F.E. contributed equally to this work.
Notes
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation.
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant 1504989.
■ REFERENCES
(1) Seery, M. K. Flipped learning in higher education chemistry:
Emerging trends and potential directions. Chem. Educ. Res. Pract.
2015, 16 (4), 758−768.
(2) Deslauriers, L.; Schelew, E.; Wieman, C. Improved learning in a
large-enrollment physics class. Science 2011, 332 (6031), 862−864.
(3) Crouch, C. H.; Mazur, E. Peer Instruction: Ten years of
experience and results. Am. J. Phys. 2001, 69 (9), 970−977.
(4) Freeman, S.; Eddy, S. L.; McDonough, M.; Smith, M. K.;
Okoroafor, N.; Jordt, H.; Wenderoth, M. P. Active learning increases
student performance in science, engineering, and mathematics. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2014, 111 (23), 8410−8415.
(5) Sweller, J. Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on
learning. Cognitive Science. 1988, 12 (2), 257.
(6) Hogan, K. Thinking aloud together: A test of an intervention to
foster students’ collaborative scientific reasoning. J. Res. Sci. Teach.
1999, 36 (10), 1085−1109.
(7) Mayer, R. E.; Moreno, R. A cognitive theory of multimedia
learning: Implications for design principles. Journal of Educational
Psychology. 1999, 91 (2), 358−368.
(8) Greer, D. L.; Crutchfield, S. A.; Woods, K. L. Cognitive theory of
multimedia learning, instructional design principles, and students with
learning disabilities in computer-based and online learning environments. Journal of Education. 2013, 193 (2), 41−50.
(9) Ryan, M. D.; Reid, S. A. Impact of the Flipped Classroom on
Student Performance and Retention: A Parallel Controlled Study in
General Chemistry. J. Chem. Educ. 2016, 93 (1), 13−23.
(10) Crimmins, M. T.; Midkiff, B. High Structure Active Learning
Pedagogy for the Teaching of Organic Chemistry: Assessing the
Impact on Academic Outcomes. J. Chem. Educ. 2017, 94 (4), 429−
438.
(11) Eichler, J. F.; Peeples, J. Flipped classroom modules for large
enrollment general chemistry courses: a low barrier approach to
increase active learning and improve student grades. Chem. Educ. Res.
Pract. 2016, 17 (1), 197−208.
(12) Rau, M. A.; Kennedy, K.; Oxtoby, L.; Bollom, M.; Moore, J. W.
Unpacking “Active Learning”: A Combination of Flipped Classroom
and Collaboration Support Is More Effective but Collaboration
Support Alone Is Not. J. Chem. Educ. 2017, 94 (10), 1406−1414.
(13) Cohen, J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences,
2nd ed.; Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: New York, NY, 1988; Chapter
9.
(14) Vandenberg, S. G.; Kuse, A. R. Mental rotations, a group test of
three-dimensional spatial visualization. Perceptual and Motor Skills.
1978, 47 (2), 599−604.
(15) Harle, M.; Towns, M. A Review of Spatial Ability Literature, Its
Connection to Chemistry, and Implications for Instruction. J. Chem.
Educ. 2011, 88, 351−360.
(16) Laverty, J. T.; Underwood, S. M.; Matz, R. L.; Posey, L. A.;
Carmel, J. H.; Caballero, M. D.; Fata-Hartley, C. L.; Ebert-May, D.;
Jardeleza, S. E.; Cooper, M. M. Characterizing College Science
Assessments: The Three-Dimensional Learning Assessment Protocol.
PLoS One 2016, 11, e0162333.
(17) Playposit. https://go.playposit.com/ (accessed October 21,
2019). Playposit is a web-based platform that allows instructors to
embed lecture videos within an assessment system. This provides an
opportunity to make the online learning more engaging for the
students, allows instructors to reward class credit for completion of
the videos, and gives students more feedback while completing these
asynchronous activities.
Journal of Chemical Education Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767
J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
H
(18) IBM Corp. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 24.0; IBM
Corp: Armonk, NY, 2016.
(19) Morris, S. B. Estimating Effect Sizes From Pretest-PosttestControl Group Designs. Organizational Research Methods. 2008, 11
(2), 364−386.
(20) Widhiarso, W.; Ravand, H. Estimating reliability coefficient for
multidimensional measures: A pedagogical illustration. Review of
Psychology 2014, 21 (2), 111−121.
(21) Chapman, C.; Ramondt, L.; Smiley, G. Strong community,
deep learning: Exploring the link. Innovations in Education and
Teaching International 2005, 42 (3), 217−230.
(22) Brindley, J.; Blaschke, L. M.; Walti, C. Creating Effective
Collaborative Learning Groups in an Online Environment. International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 2009, 10
(3), DOI: 10.19173/irrodl.v10i3.675.
(23) Stull, A. T.; Hegarty, M. Model Manipulation and Learning:
Fostering Representational Competence with Virtual and Concrete
Models. Journal of Educational Psychology 2016, 108 (4), 509−527.
Journal of Chemical Education Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00767
J. Chem. Educ. XXXX, XXX, XXX−XXX
I